Singing voice analysis is important for music information retrieval because a singing voice usually forms a large part of the melody line of popular music, and provides much information about music. Singing voice analysis techniques such as vocal F0 estimation [1,3,7,9,14] and singing voice separation [8,12] have actively been studied and applied to singer identification [10,22], karaoke generation [19], query-by-humming [8], and active music listening [6]. To leverage musical information conveyed by singing voices, it is helpful to convert a vocal F0 trajectory to a musical score containing only discrete symbols. In this study, we tackle musical note estimation for vocal F0 trajectories that tend to have large deviations from original musical scores. The pitches and onset times of musical notes in a musical score can take only discrete values, whereas an F0 trajectory is a continuous signal that can dynamically and smoothly vary over time. F0 trajectories are modulated by vibrato and changes smoothly from one note to another by a portamento. Naive time-frequency quantization of an F0 trajectory therefore outputs a note sequence that often includes statistically-rare chromatic note progressions with unlikely rhythms.
To solve this problem, we propose a statistical method of scale-and rhythm-aware musical note estimation based on integration of a score model describing the process of generating a note sequence and an F0 model describing the process of generating an F0 trajectory from the note sequence (Fig. 1). In the score model, a sequence of musical scales (local keys) is determined by a Markov process and the semitone-level pitch of each note is then determined according to both a scale of the note position and the pitch of a previous note. The onset position of each note on a tatum grid is determined according to that of a previous note to make rhythmic structures. In the F0 model, the timefrequency deviations are added to a step-function-shaped F0 trajectory corresponding to a musical score given by the score model. The integrated model is thus formulated as a hierarchical hidden semi-Markov model (HHSMM). Given a vocal F0 trajectory with a tatum grid, the scales, musical notes, and F0 deviations, which are all latent variables of the proposed model, are jointly estimated by us-ing a Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm. A key feature of our method is that musical scales and rhythms work as self-organizing constraints on time-frequency quantization of vocal F0 trajectories.
In this section, we introduce related work on the analysis of singing voices.
Estimation of vocal F0 trajectories for music audio signals has actively been studied [1,3,7,9,14], and the outputs of these methods can be used as inputs of our method. One of the most basic method is subharmonic summation (SHS) [7] that calculates the sum of the harmonic components of each candidate F0. Ikemiya et al. [9] improved F0 estimation based on SHS and singing voice separation based on robust principle component analysis (RPCA) [8] by using the mutual dependency of those two tasks. Salamon et al. [21] estimated contours of the melody F0 candidates by calculating a salience function and then recursively removed contours which do not form a melody line by using the characteristics of each contour. Durrieu et al. [3] extracted a main melody by representing accompaniments with a model inspired by non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) and leading voices with a source-filter model. Mauch et al. [14] modified the YIN [1] in a probabilistic way so that the modified system could determine multiple candidate fundamental frequencies and then select one at each frame by using an HMM.
Estimation of musical notes from sung melody has been a hot research topic [6,11,13,15,17,18,20,23]. A naive method is to take the majority of vocal F0s in each interval of a regular grid [6]. Paiva et al. [17] proposed a cascading method based on multipitch detection, multipitch trajectory construction, segmentation of multipitch trajectory, elimination of irrelevant notes, and extraction of notes that form a main melody. Raphael [18] proposed an HMMbased method that estimates pitches, rhythms, and tempos when the number of notes is given. The rhythm and onset deviation models used in [18] are similar to those used in our method. Laaksonen et al. [11] divided audio data into segments corresponding to scales and notes by focusing on the boundaries of chords given as input, and independently estimated the notes based on a score function. Ryynänen et al. [20] proposed a method based on a hierarchical HMM in order to capture the different kinds of vocal fluctuations (e.g., vibrato and portamento) within one note. In this model, the transition between pitches is represented in the upper-level HMM and the transition between the vocal fluctuations is represented in the lower-level HMM. Molina et al. [15] focused on the hysteresis characteristics of vocal F0s. Nishikimi et al. [16] proposed a method based on an HHM that represents the generative process of a vocal F0 trajectory considering the time and frequency deviations. Yang et al. [23] proposed a method based on a hierarchical HMM that represents the generative process of the f 0 -∆f 0 plane. Mauch et al. [13] developed a software tool called Tony for extracting pitches. In this tool, a vocal F0 trajectory is estimated by PYIN [14], and musical notes are estimated by a modified version of Ryynänen's method [20].
This section explains the proposed method of estimating a sequence of musical notes from a vocal F0 trajectory. The method is based on an HHSMM (Fig. 1) that stochastically generates the F0 trajectory with time-frequency deviations from a sequence of musical notes depending on musical scales. The upper part of the proposed model is an HMM that stochastically generates a sequence of musical notes according to the scales that are assigned to bars. The lower part is an HSMM that represents the musical notes and temporal deviations as latent variables and the frequency deviations as F0 emission probabilities.
The problem we tackle is defined as follows:
where T is the number of frames in a vocal F0 trajectory, x t is a log frequency at time t, and N is the number of 16thnote-level tatums. u n ∈ {1, . . ., T +1} is the time of tatum n and the beginning and end of music are represented as u 0 = 1 and u N = T +1, respectively. v n ∈ {0, . . ., 15} is the relative position of tatum n in a bar. J is the number of musical notes estimated by proposed methods, and the j-th note z j is represented as a pair consisting of an pitch p j ∈ {1, . . . , K} and a note length l j ∈ {1, . . . , L} in the unit of tatums, where K is the number of kinds of semitone-level pitches, and p j indicates any one in {µ 1 , . . . , µ K }, which is a set of log frequencies corresponding to semitone-level pitches. For convenience we introduce the initial note z 0 that does not appear in the actual score.
This section describes the score model constructed with an HMM that represents rhythms and pitches of musical notes under musical scales.
Scales are represented as S = {s m } M m=0 , where M denotes the number of bars in the musical piece and s m denotes the scale at the m-th bar. For convenience, we introduce the initial bar s 0 to which the initial note z 0 belongs. Instead of fixing one scale for the whole piece, the scale is allowed to change at bar lines. Each scale s m takes one of the 24 values of {C, C#, • • • , B} × {major, minor}. The latent variables S are described by a Markov chain as
where π∈R 24 ≥0 is a set of initial probabilities and ξ s ∈R 24 ≥0 is a set of transition probabilities.  
The sequence of pitches P is generated by a Markov chain depending on scales S as follows (Fig. 2):
where
is a set of transition probabilities, and m is the index of a bar to which the note z j belongs. Moreover, ϕ s0p0 and ψ smpj-1pj are defined as
where ŝ∈{major,minor} is the mode of scale s and deg(p;s) ∈{0, . . . , 11} is the degree of pitch p in scale s (defined as the relative pitch class of p from the tonic of scale s). φ * and ψ * are the initial and transition probabilities of pitch classes, given the scales.
Considering the transition between onset positions of adjacent notes, the model makes Z have the plausible rhythm. Let r j-1 ∈ {v n } N n=1 be the onset position of the j-th note z j . The transition probability is given by
where the distance between r j-1 and r j indicates the note value l j of note z j . We assume that r 0 = v 0 and r J = v N .
The section describes the F0 model based on an HSMM that represents the generative process of a vocal F0 trajectory. In our model, the pitches, onsets, and temporal deviations are represented as latent variables, and the frequency deviations are represented as emission probabilities. 
We assume that vocal F0 trajectories include the following two types of temporal deviations (Fig. 3a):
Onset deviation: the gap between the vocal onset time and the note onset time.
F0 transitional duration: the time it takes for singing voices to finish transitioning from one pitch to the next.
The onset deviations G = {g j } J j=0 accompanying with Z are represented as discrete latent variables. Each g j can take an integer value between -G and G. As with the onset position model, g j-1 denotes the onset deviation of note z j . We assume that each g j is independently generated by
where ρ ∈ R 2G+1 ≥0 is a set of onset deviation probabilities. We assume that there are no deviations for the onset of the first note and the offset of the last note, i.e., g 0 = g J = 0.
The F0 transitional durations D = {d j } J j=1 accompanying with Z are also represented as discrete latent variables. Each d j can take a value from 1 to D. The continuous transition of vocal F0s between notes z j-1 and z j is represented by a slanted line spanning d j frames. We assume that each d j is independently generated as follows:
where η ∈ R D ≥0 is a set of duration probabilities.
The vocal F0 trajectory X = {x t } T t=1 is generated by imparting probabilistic frequency deviations to the sequence of notes to which probabilistic temporal deviations have already been imparted (Fig. 3b). Assuming that x t is independently generated at each frame, the emission probability of the j-th note z j is given by p
where x τ ′ :τ -1 indicates x τ ′ , . . . , x τ -1 , λ is a scale parameter that represents the scale of the frequency deviations, δ is Kronecker's delta, and μt (Fig. 4) is a location parameter given by μt =
When the onset of note z j+1 is located at the n-th tatum, τ j = u n + g j and τ j-1 = u n-lj + g j-1 .
'HJUHH
The configuration of the hyperemarameter a φ ŝ .
We put conjugate Dirichlet priors on categorical model parameters π, ξ, φ, ψ, ζ, ρ, and η as follows:
) ,
where , and a η ∈R D + are hyperparameters. The probability distribution over the 12 pitch classes under a scale is estimated using the priors on the initial and transitional probabilities of those classes. As illustrated in Fig. 5, we set the hyperparameters a φ ŝ and a ψ ŝdeg(p;s) so that the probability distributions represent the diatonic scales, respectively. Since the Cauchy distribution does not have a conjugate prior, we put a Gamma prior on λ as
where a λ 0 and a λ 1 are shape and rate hyperparameters.
Given an F0 trajectory X, we aim to calculate the posterior distribution p(Q, S, Θ|X), where Q = {P , L, G, D} (latent variables) and Θ = {π, ξ, φ, ψ, ζ, ρ, η} (model parameters). Since this calculation is analytically intractable, we use Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. To get samples of the latent variables S and Q, forward filtering-backward sampling algorithms are used. To get samples of Θ except for λ, a set of parameters with conjugate priors, a Gibbs sampling algorithm is used. Since there is no conjugate prior for the parameter λ, we use the Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm. Since S and Q share the sequence of notes Z and are mutually dependent, each variable is updated as follows:
1. Initialize notes Z with a majority-vote method.
2. Update the sequence of scales S based on given Z. 3. Update Q based on given S. 4. Update the model parameters Θ. 5. Return to 2.
Given the sequence of notes Z, each s m is sampled in accordance with the probability given by β S sm = p(s m |s m+1:M , Z), (14) where s m+1:M represents s m+1 , . . . , s M . The calculation of Eq. ( 14) and sampling of scales S are performed by the forward filtering-backward sampling method.
In forward filtering, we recursively calculate the probability α S sm as follows:
where j m is the index of the first note whose onset belongs to the m-th bar. j m can be calculated from given note values L.
In backward sampling, Eq. ( 14) is calculated by using the values calculated in forward filtering, and scales are sampled recursively as follows:
The latent variables Q can be estimated in a way similar to that in which the latent variables S are inferred. In forward filtering, we recursively calculate the probability α Q pnln,gndn as follows:
, (20) where τ n = u n + g n , n ′ = n -l n , and m(n ′ ) is the index of the bar that the n ′ -th tatum belongs to. p n , l n , g n , and d n are the variables of forward messages that correspond to the note whose offset position is at the n-th tatum u n . Note that these variables are different from j-indexed variables p j , l j , g j , and d j . Since the onset and offset times of the note z n = (p n , l n ) are respectively the (n-l n )-th tatum and the n-th tatum, the probability p(l n ) which appears in the recursive calculation of Eq. ( 20) is replaced by p(r n |r n-ln ).
In backward sampling, the posterior distribution of the latent variables is calculated by using the values calculated in forward filtering, and notes and temporal deviations are sampled recursively as follows:
The posterior distributions of the model parameters with the prior distributions are calculated using S and Q obtained in the backward sampling steps, and these parameters are sampled according to the posterior distributions as follows:  ) is increased by one when there is a transition from a pitch p to a pitch p ′ under a scale s in the sampled latent variables.
To apply the MH sampling to the parameter λ, we define a random-walk proposal distribution as follows:
where λ * is a proposal, λ is the current sample, and γ is a hyperparameter. The proposal λ * is accepted as the next sample according to the probability given by
where L(λ) is the complete joint likelihood of λ given by
{p j , l j , g j , d j } J j=0 are the values sampled in the backward sampling. The value of λ is updated by λ * only when the value of A(λ * , λ) is larger than a random number sampled from the uniform distribution U(0, 1).
The sequence of latent variables S and Q are estimated with the Viterbi algorithm with the model parameters that maximize the joint distribution p(X, Q, S, Θ|Φ) in the learning process. As in the inference of latent variables, we initialize Z by the majority-vote method, S is estimated based on Z, and then Q is estimated depending on the S estimated in the previous step.
In the Viterbi decoding on scales S, the value ω S s is recursively calculated as follows:
In the recursive calculation of ω S s , the previous state s m-1 that maximizes the value of ω S sm is memorized as c S sm , and the scales S are recursively estimated as follows:
In the Viterbi decoding on variables Q, the value ω Q plgd is recursively calculated as follows:
where w ϕ , w ψ , w ρ , w η , w ζ , and w e are the weight parameters that control the balance between probabilities. In the recursive calculation of ω Q plgd , the previous states p n ′ , l n ′ , g n ′ , and d n ′ which maximize the value of ω Q pnlngndn are memorized as c Q pnlngndn , and the variables Q are recursively estimated as follows:
We report comparative experiments conducted to evaluate the performance of the proposed method in musical note estimation from vocal F0 trajectories.
Among the 100 pieces of popular music in the RWC music database [5], we used 63 pieces that do not include 32nd notes, triplets, harmonizing parts, and overlaps of adjacent notes, which the proposed method cannot deal with. The input F0 trajectories were obtained from the annotation data [4] or automatically estimated by using the stateof-the-art melody extraction method proposed in [9]. The annotation data contain unvoiced regions and the estimation data do not. The tatum times and onset positions were obtained from the annotation data. The Bayesian inference and Viterbi decoding were independently conducted for each song. The onset transition probabilities were learned in advance from a corpus of rock music [2] without Bayesian learning. The hyperparameters were a π =1, a ξ s =, a ζ r =1, a ρ = a η = a λ 0 = a λ 1 = γ =1, where and 1 respectively represent the matrix and vector whose elements are all ones. The elements of a φ ŝ and a ψ ŝdeg(p;s) corresponding to musical notes on the scale of ŝ were 10 and the others were 1. The weight parameters of the Viterbi algorithm were empirically set as w ϕ = w ψ = 29.4, w ρ = 2.4, w η = 2.9, w ζ = 48.5, and w e = 3.8. For comparison, we tested the majority-vote method as a baseline and the latest conventional method based on a semi-beat-synchronous HMM [16]. Since the conventional method cannot deal with unvoiced regions in a vocal F0 trajectory given as input, we only tested the method for the estimation data. To evaluate the effectiveness of the score model, we tested four versions of the proposed method; a method that does not consider scales (scale transition probabilities) and rhythms (onset transition probabilities), a method considering only scales, a method considering only rhythms, the full method considering both scales and rhythms. To accelerate the inference, the search range of pitches was limited around the pitches estimated by the majority-vote method.
To evaluate the performance of each method, we calculated tatum-level and note-level matching rates by comparing the estimated sequences of musical notes with the ground-truth data. The tatum-level matching rate is the rate of the number of tatum units whose pitches were estimated correctly to the total number of tatum units whose pitches exist in the ground-truth scores. The note-level matching rate is the rate of the number of musical notes whose pitches, onsets, and offsets were estimated correctly to the total number of musical notes in the ground-truth scores. If adjacent notes in the ground-truth scores have the same pitch or are connected by a tie, those notes were regarded as a single note. Since the compared method [16] outputs a pitch in a 16th-note-wise manner, a sequence of the same pitches was regarded as a single note.
The experimental results are shown in Table 1 1 . The proposed method outperformed the majority-vote method and the conventional method in terms of both measures. Comparing the tatum-level matching rates obtained by the four versions of the proposed method, we confirmed that the score model improved the performance of musical note estimation. The use of the onset transition probabilities 1 The results of music note estimation by the proposed method are available online: http://sap.ist.  (rhythm constraints) was found to be more effective than that of the scale transition probabilities (scale constraints). Although the tatum-level matching rate obtained the proposed method (68.7%) was close to that obtained by the conventional method (68.0%), the note-level matching rate obtained the proposed method (30.7%) was better than that obtained by the conventional method (14.8%), This is a remarkable advantage of the proposed HHSMM that can directly represent both the pitches and durations (onsets and offsets) of musical notes on symbolic musical scores, not on continuous-time piano rolls.
Examples of estimated musical scores are illustrated in Fig. 6. The proposed method yielded the almost accurate musical score except that some notes were merged. To correctly recognize two adjacent notes with the same pitch, it is necessary to refer to original singing voices or music audio signals. The score estimated without considering the score model, on the other hand, included a lot of wrong notes that were inconsistent with music theory. This result also shows the effectiveness of using the score model as musical constraints on musical note estimation.
This paper presented a statistical method for musical note estimation from a vocal F0 trajectory. Our method is based on an HHSMM that combines a score model (HMM) representing the generative process of a musical score from musical scales with an F0 model (HSMM) representing the generative process of a vocal F0 trajectory with timefrequency deviation from the musical score. We confirmed that the proposed method can yield more musically-consistent sequences of musical notes.
One of the most interesting directions of this research is to use the proposed model as a musically-meaningful prior distribution on a vocal F0 trajectory in vocal F0 estimation for music audio signals. We plan to integrate the proposed "language" model that generates an F0 trajectory from a musical score with an acoustic model that generates a spectrogram from the F0 trajectory in a hierarchical Bayesian manner. This enables us to jointly learn the vocal F0 trajectory and musical score from music audio signals. Joint estimation of beat times and F0s is worth investigating to overcome the problem of estimation-error accumulation in the cascaded estimation approach.
Proceedings of the 18th ISMIR Conference, Suzhou, China, October[23][24][25][26][27] 2017  
Proceedings of the 18th ISMIR Conference, Suzhou, China, October[23][24][25][26][27] 2017   