We present ScorePerformer, an encoder-decoder trans-
former with hierarchical style encoding heads for control-
lable rendering of expressive piano music performances.
We design a tokenized representation of symbolic score
and performance music, the Score Performance Music tu-
ple (SPMuple), and validate a novel way to encode the
local performance tempo in a local note time window.
Along with the encoding, we extend a transformer encoder
with multi-level maximum mean discrepancy variational
autoencoder style modeling heads that learn performance
style at the global, bar, beat, and onset levels for ﬁne-
grained performance control. To offer an interpretation of
the learned latent spaces, we introduce performance direc-
tion marking classiﬁers that associate vectors in the latent
space with direction markings to guide performance ren-
dering through the model. Evaluation results show the im-
portance of the architectural design choices and demon-
strate that ScorePerformer produces diverse and coherent
piano performances that follow the control input.
1. INTRODUCTION
Musical expression is the human touch that transforms a
written piece of music into an emotionally moving experi-
ence. In musical interpretation and performance, the musi-
cian interprets a musical score and translates the intended
expression through the control of the musical instrument,
the sound of which conveys affect and emotion to the lis-
tener [1, 2]. However, effective control of musical instru-
ments often requires considerable expertise and training,
making musical expression less accessible than it could be.
Deep learning music performance models reduce the
need for musical expertise and open up new ways to cre-
ate and perform music [3,4]. To render expressive perfor-
mances of written music [5, 6], the models mix recurrent
neural networks to learn temporal dependencies in music
with variational autoencoders to encode performance style
and enable controllable generation [7–11]. The models are
trained on real and categorical score and performance fea-
tures for aligned score and performance notes.
© I. Borovik and V. Viro. Licensed under a Creative Com-
mons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Attribution:
I. Borovik and V. Viro, “ScorePerformer: Expressive Piano Performance
Rendering with Fine-Grained Control”, in Proc. of the 24th Int. Society
for Music Information Retrieval Conf., Milan, Italy, 2023.
The related task of symbolic music generation is ap-
proached differently. Transformer models [12] are primar-
ily utilized due to their ability to effectively learn long-term
dependencies in music sequences [13–17]. The symbolic
music is encoded as sequences of musical tokens, either
individual [15,18,19] or stacked into tuples [16,20]. Sim-
ilar approaches could be applied to the task of rendering
expressive music performances for written compositions.
Aiming to advance the research and make musical ex-
pression more accessible, we develop ScorePerformer 1 ,
a piano music performance rendering model with inter-
active ﬁne-grained performance style control. The model
combines encoder and decoder transformers [12] with hi-
erarchical maximum mean discrepancy variational autoen-
coders [21, 22] that encode performance style representa-
tions at the global, bar, beat, and onset levels.
To interpret the learned style embedding spaces, we
train embedding classiﬁers that associate local perfor-
mance contexts with written musical score direction mark-
ings. For each marking, we use the classiﬁer predictions to
compute the average delta vectors in the style space from
negatively to positively classiﬁed style embeddings. These
vectors provide quantiﬁed model control inputs to move
the performance rendering per given direction marking.
For data encoding, we design a tokenized representa-
tion of score and performance music, a Score-Performance
Music tuple (SPMuple). It introduces a local window on-
set tempo function that produces smoother and more robust
tempos than inset-bar, -beat, or -onset tempo functions.
The experiments and evaluation results show that the
model trained on the designed encoding successfully cap-
tures different performance styles, can sample diverse and
coherent piano performances, and can be used for expres-
sive performance rendering with ﬁne-grained style control.
Our main contributions are:
1. We extend transformers for expressive piano per-
formance rendering with hierarchical style encoding
and control at the global, bar, beat, and onset levels;
2. We design a tokenized encoding for aligned score
and performance music that proposes an efﬁcient lo-
cal tempo computation function;
3. We introduce performance direction classiﬁers to
provide musical language-driven performance con-
trol by modifying the learned style latent spaces.
1 Source code and demo are available at: https://github.com/
ilya16/scoreperformer

2. RELATED WORK
Expressive Music Performance: Recent expressive mu-
sic performance rendering models mainly utilize deep
learning methods [3, 6]. Jeong et al. [8] and Maezawa et
al. [9] use conditional variational autoencoders for perfor-
mance style encoding and recurrent neural networks for
expressive performance rendering. Rhyu et al. [11] allow
performance style to be intuitively “sketched” by a set of
learned latent representations. We propose to use trans-
formers with self-attention mechanisms [12] to infer pat-
terns in music performance and model its style through hi-
erarchical style encoding heads.
Symbolic Music Generation: Symbolic music gen-
eration with deep learning [4] is dominated by trans-
formers for learning long-term sequential musical patterns
[13, 15–17, 23] and variational autoencoders for unsuper-
vised style encoding and control [19, 23–26]. The models
offer unconditional or priming melody-based music gen-
eration [14], global control of performance style [14, 25]
or ﬁne-grained control of music through learned high-level
features [23,26] and descriptions [19]. Our model is close
to the melody-conditioned transformer autoencoder [14],
but introduces modiﬁcations for the task of score-based
performance rendering with style control.
Symbolic Music Encoding: The simplest way to en-
code symbolic music is a MIDI-like encoding with note-
on, note-off, and time-shift events [13, 18]. REMI [15],
REMI+ [19], and Compound Word [16] replace position
shifts with absolute bar, position, and beat tempo tokens.
OctupleMIDI [20] shortens sequence lengths by stacking
note attributes into tuples of 8 tokens. For expressive mu-
sic performance rendering, it is common to mix real, cat-
egorical and pianoroll-based score and performance fea-
tures parsed from MusicXML and MIDI ﬁles [8,9,11,27].
Transformers work well with tokenized data [12, 28, 29].
Inspired by OctupleMIDI, we design a tuple-like token en-
coding that naturally ﬁts aligned score-performance data.
3. DATA ENCODING
3.1 Score and Performance Data Matching
Expressive music performance rendering models require
datasets of aligned score and performance music [5,30]. In
this work, we consider piano music performances in MIDI
format and use the following data preparation pipeline.
First, we compute alignments using Nakamura’s alignment
tool [31].
The alignments may contain errors, such as
alignment holes or close performance notes aligned with
distant and unrelated score notes.
Following the litera-
ture [8, 32], we revise the alignments and ﬁlter out notes
that deviate from the local performance tempo. After the
cleanup, we omit performances with less than 80% aligned
notes. Finally, to achieve a perfect match, we remove ex-
tra performed notes and interpolate missing notes using the
local performance tempos and dynamics, since taking only
matched notes and discarding score notes can result in the
removal of important chord and bar information.
3.2 SPMuple Encoding
We introduce the Score-Performance Music tuple (SPMu-
ple), a tokenized representation for aligned symbolic score
and performance music. It encodes performed notes using
tuples of 8 score and 4 performance tokens.
Score Tokens: a set of features extracted from the score
MIDI. Pitch is a MIDI pitch number in the range 21 to
108. Duration is a score note value, encoded by 128 to-
kens with high and low resolution tokens for short and long
durations, respectively [20,33]. Bar is an index of the mu-
sical bar to which the note refers, ranging from 0 to the
maximum bar in the data. Position is the position of the
note in the bar, one of 128 tokens with 64th note resolution.
TimeSignature is the time signature of the beat containing
the note, a set of 22 tokens for 2nd, 4th, and 8th note beat
lengths, with a maximum bar length of 2 whole notes for
2nd note, and 1.5 for 4th and 8th note. OnsetShift is the
positional interval between the current and previous note
onsets (chords). NotesInOnset and PositionInOnset are
the number of notes and the index of the note in the onset,
ranging from 1 to 12, notes are ordered by pitch.
Performance Tokens: a set of performance features
extracted from the performance MIDI and processed us-
ing the aligned score note features. Velocity is a MIDI
velocity from 1 to 127. Tempo is the performance tempo
at the bar, beat or onset level, encoded by a geometric se-
quence of 121 tokens for beats per minute tempos from 15
to 480. RelOnsetDeviation models the exact timing of the
note, encoded as the ratio of the absolute note-onset posi-
tion deviation to the inter-onset interval scaled by the local
onset tempo using 161 tokens for values in the range -2 to
2. RelPerformedDuration is an articulation of the per-
formed note, computed as the ratio of the performed dura-
tion to the score duration, scaled by the local onset tempo,
and encoded by 121 tokens for logarithmically distributed
values between 0.1 and 3.
The score and performance token sequences are sorted
by score note start position, pitch and duration.
3.3 Local Tempo
Inset-onset tempos are noisy and have very high variance,
while beat and bar tempos are smoother but still ﬂuctuate
at beat/bar boundaries, which can lead to degraded musical
experience [34–36]. We design a smooth alternative, local
onset tempos, weighted with respect to previous onsets in
the local onset time window.
Let {IOIs
i} and {IOIp
i } be the sets of score and per-
formance inter-onset intervals between the onset o and N
preceding onsets oi in the time window W. The weights
wo
i for inter-onset tempos IOIs
i
IOIp
i are computed as:
wo
i = 1 −
IOIp
i
maxj{IOIp
j} + 10−2
(1)
The weights give more attention to the closest preceding
onsets, but still consider the more distant onsets to smooth
the local tempo. Based on the decoding quality, we set
the time window length W to 8s as the optimal one. In
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023

ScorePerformer Architecture
Performance
Decoder
Direction
Classifiers
f
p
crescendo
staccato
ritardando
Direction Classifiers
Velocity
Tempo
OnsetDev
PerfDuration
Inference
Training
Performance
Encoder
Score
Encoder
Past Performance
Current Note
Score Context
Performance Style
Control Input
bar
onset
beat
global
Encoder
Transformer
Performance Style Encoder
Head
Head
Head
Head
 Onset
 Beat
 All
 Bar
Figure 1. The overall architecture of ScorePerformer, hierarchical style encoding heads and direction classiﬁers.
addition to the window W, we ﬁlter out the nearest onsets
with IOIp
i < 0.5 to reduce the effect of immediate tempo
changes, and take at least Nmin = 8 past onsets with any
IOIp to have enough points for smoothing (N ≥Nmin).
4. MODEL
With a focus on hierarchical performance style control
and efﬁcient training on tokenized sequences, we present
ScorePerformer, an encoder-decoder model that com-
bines transformers [12] and maximum mean discrepancy
variational autoencoders (MMD-VAE) [21,22] for control-
lable expressive rendering of piano performances for writ-
ten scores. The model is illustrated in Figure 1.
4.1 Model Architecture
Score Encoder is an encoder transformer that computes a
contextual representation of the written music. It maps a
score note sequence y+ ∈NN×10 (score tokens y + score
tempos and velocities) to note embeddings cs ∈RL×D.
Performance Encoder is an encoder transformer that
computes performance style representations at different
levels of the musical hierarchy. It takes a sequence of mu-
sic tuples of score and performance tokens m = [y, x],
y ∈NN×8, x ∈NN×4, and outputs performance context
embeddings cp ∈RN×D. The embeddings are grouped
and averaged over the entire sequence, bars, beats, and on-
sets, and iteratively passed through conditional linear lay-
ers to compute global, bar, beat, and onset latents zG, zB,
zb, and zo. With the idea of learning missing lower-level
details hierarchically, at each step t the latent z∗
t depends
on the context cp
t and all higher-level latents containing the
note, e.g. zb
t = f b
φ(cp
t , zG
t , zB
t ). All note latents are stacked
to produce note-level style embeddings z ∈RN×Dz.
The latent spaces are ﬁt into the Gaussian distribution
using a maximum mean discrepancy objective:
LMMD(p∥q) = Ep(z),p(z′)[k(z, z′)] + Eq(z),q(z′)[k(z, z′)]
−2Ep(z),q(z′)[k(z, z′)],
(2)
where k(z, z′) = e−∥z−z′∥2
is a Gaussian kernel.
We use MMD-VAE [21,22] to solve issues with poste-
rior collapse and latent space holes [37] common to con-
ventional variational autoencoders [38], especially, when
trained on sequential data [39].
Performance Decoder is a decoder transformer that
renders performance by sequentially predicting perfor-
mance tokens xt for score note tokens yt. The input token
sequence combines two sequences: 1) a sequence ms = y
with the current score notes to be rendered; 2) a sequence
m−1 = [y−1, x−1] shifted one step into the past score y−1
and rendered performance tokens x−1 describing the past
performance history. To reuse the SPMuple token embed-
der, the ﬁrst sequence is extended with the masked per-
formance tokens. The two sequence embeddings are con-
catenated with the score context cs and passed to the trans-
former layers together with the style embeddings z.
We use style-adaptive layer normalization (SALN) [40]
and pass style embeddings z to the decoder’s layer nor-
malization layers, rather than concatenating the style and
input token embeddings, to increase the focus on the per-
formance style at each transformer layer.
The performance decoder minimizes the negative log-
likelihood for the sequence of performance tokens x:
Lperf = −
N
X
t=1
log pθ(xt|x<t, y≤t, c≤t, z≤t)
(3)
4.2 Transformer Modiﬁcations
Discrete+Continuous Tokens: Discrete musical tokens
do not explicitly encode the absolute and relative informa-
tion about note attributes, e.g. that pitches C2, C3, and
C4 differ by an octave, or that velocity 80 is louder than
60. We mix discrete and continuous tokens by summing
learned discrete token embeddings with delta embeddings
provided by a learned nonlinear mapping of the real values
associated with tokens to the token embedding dimensions.
Relative Attention: We use the learned ALiBi relative
positional bias [41] in the decoder and the learned bidi-
rectional symmetric bias [42] in the encoder for efﬁcient
interpolation to sequence lengths not seen during training.
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023

Other: We use single key-value attention heads [43] to
speed up decoding, SwiGLU activation [44,45] in feedfor-
ward layers, reuse token embedding weights between the
encoders and decoder since they share token vocabularies,
and tie input and output embeddings in the decoder [45].
4.3 Performance Direction Classiﬁers
We provide an intuitive interpretation of the learned style
embedding space by training performance direction clas-
siﬁers on the learned note style embeddings. We extract
performance direction markings from MusicXML ﬁles
and associate score notes with performance direction la-
bels where they are present. We train classiﬁers for dy-
namics (degrees of piano and forte), dynamic changes
(crescendo and diminuendo), tempo (adagio, largo, etc.),
tempo changes (accelerando, ritardando, etc.) and note
articulation binary classes (staccato, fermata, etc.).
Classiﬁers take as input the combined note-level perfor-
mance style embeddings z = [zG, zB, zb, zo] and output
the probabilities of directions being performed in a given
performance context. The module minimizes the sum of
cross entropy losses for K classiﬁers with Ck classes each:
Lclf =
K
X
k=1
Lk
clf = −1
N
K
X
k=1
N
X
t=1
Ck
X
c=1
dk
t,c log( ˆdk
t,c),
(4)
where dk
t,c and ˆdk
t,c are true and predicted labels for direc-
tion c of the classiﬁer k at step t.
Given the smoothness of the learned latent space, the
differences between embeddings with high and low classi-
ﬁcation scores for a given marking may provide a direction
in the latent space to move the generation toward the mark-
ing. We compute and use mean per-marking delta embed-
dings to control performance rendering. Since markings
are related to deﬁned musical concepts, we can map natu-
ral language commands, such as “play more piano here”
or “switch to largo”, to quantitative model control inputs.
4.4 Training and Inference
The total loss minimized by the model during training is:
L = Lperf + LMMD + Lclf
(5)
To avoid overﬁtting of the decoder to lower-level perfor-
mance embeddings during training, we drop bar, beat, and
onset embeddings with probabilities of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4,
respectively. The embeddings are dropped inclusively, i.e.
if the bar latent is dropped out, all beat and onset latents
are also dropped. Additionally, the classiﬁers are trained
on detached style embeddings z, as we found the model to
overﬁt the unbalanced direction markings labels.
During inference, the sampled or modiﬁed reference
performance embeddings can be used to control the render-
ing of the music performance. Based on the learned style
spaces, the control can range from high-level global to low-
level onset. The extracted performance direction delta em-
beddings can be used to provide intuitive, command-driven
performance manipulation. The model supports real-time
inference on the CPU for use in interactive applications.
5. EXPERIMENTS
Datasets: For all experiments, we use the ASAP dataset of
matched piano scores and performances [46], preprocessed
as described in Section 3.1. The prepared dataset repre-
sents 212 musical compositions by 15 composers with a
total of 937 performances, 79 hours of performed music.
The data is divided into training and evaluation sets with an
approximate ratio of 9:1 for the number of performances in
the entire dataset and for each composer.
Implementation: The SPMuple data encoding is im-
plemented using miditok’s [33] MIDI tokenizer inter-
face. The encoders and decoders in all experiments have a
hidden dimension of 256, 4 layers, and 4 attention heads,
except for the score encoder, which has 2 layers. The to-
ken embedding dimension is set to 128 for each token type,
the projected embedding dimension for input embeddings
is set to 256. The global, bar, beat, and onset latent dimen-
sions are set to 32, 20, 8, and 4, respectively.
Training: The maximum sequence length during train-
ing is set to 256 tokens. To regularize the model and arti-
ﬁcially increase the variety of data, we augment the data
with sampled pitch shifts (up to ±3 semitones) and ve-
locity shifts (up to ±12 MIDI values). In addition, we
randomly replace real performances with deadpan perfor-
mances with a probability of 25% to allow the model to
learn the style of both expressive and inexpressive music.
We use the ADAM optimizer [47] with an initial learning
rate of 2 · 10−4, decaying by 0.995 after each epoch. Mod-
els are trained for 70,000 iterations with batch size 128.
Evaluation: We conduct three sets of experiments: 1)
evaluation of the designed data encoding and different lo-
cal tempo calculation functions; 2) comparison of different
latent style hierarchies and their impact on performance
rendering; 3) an ablation study on the model architec-
ture design. For the metrics, we use Pearson correlation
[9, 11, 48] and mean absolute error for performance fea-
tures: inter-onset intervals (IOI), absolute onset deviations
(OD), performed note durations (PD), and velocity (Vel).
We generate 3 samples for each performance in the evalu-
ation set and compute and average the metrics between the
ground truth and the generated performances, decoded to
MIDI. The errors are measured in seconds, except for ve-
locities, which are measured in MIDI velocity values. Af-
ter the objective evaluation, we analyze the generation and
control capabilities of the designed ScorePerformer model.
6. EVALUATION
6.1 Encoding and Local Tempos
The tokenized representation of performance is not loss-
less, since some information is lost during feature quanti-
zation. We evaluate the decoding quality and performance
of ScorePerformer on sequences encoded using SPMuple
with different local tempo functions.
Table 1 shows the evaluation results. The local window
onset tempo function (Section 3.3) shows the least degra-
dation in decoding quality for inter-onset intervals and on-
set deviations. It captures local tempo changes and note
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023

Decoded
Generated, ∆z = 0
Error ↓
Correlation ↑
Error ↓
Correlation ↑
Tempo
IOI
OD
PD
IOI
OD
PD
IOI
OD
PD
Vel
IOI
OD
PD
Vel
Bar
Beat
Onset
Window
Table 1. Encoding evaluation on decoded performances and performances generated with unaltered style embeddings from
the performance encoder. IOI – inter-onset interval, OD – onset deviation, PD – performed duration, Vel – velocity.
G
B
b
o
z
IOI
OD
PD
Vel
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Table 2. Correlation with ground truth performances for
samples generated by models trained with different com-
binations of latent hierarchies. G – global, B – bar, b –
beat, o – onset, and z – total latent dimensions.
timing more efﬁciently than bar, beat and onset tempos.
These ﬁndings are supported by the generation results. The
model trained with local window tempo tokens renders
samples with smaller errors and closer to the ground truth
than the models trained with bar, beat, or onset tempo to-
kens. In particular, it shows more consistency in modeling
local tempo changes and note timing. For future work, the
encoding could be further improved by incorporating ped-
als, an essential element of piano performance [49].
6.2 Style Embedding Hierarchies
Table 2 shows the impact of different learned style em-
bedding hierarchy combinations in ScorePerformer on the
quality of performance rendering. Replacing lower-level
latents with higher-level ones, using only a single level,
or omitting any level of the hierarchy leads to a decrease
in quality for all musical features. The lower-level onset
latents account for most of the variation in performance
features, while the higher-level latents provide the missing
performance timing, articulation, and dynamics informa-
tion at the beat, bar, and global levels. The results suggest
that a hierarchical style representation is advantageous for
modeling global and local changes in music performance.
The search for an optimal conﬁguration of latent dimen-
sions is beyond the scope of this study.
IOI
OD
PD
Vel
ScorePerformer
w/o Score Encoder
w/o input seq. ms
w/o SALN
w/o in-out emb. tie
w/o Continuous Tokens
Table 3. Evaluation of model conﬁgurations using the cor-
relation between ground truth and generated performances.
6.3 Ablation Study
The ablation study on the ScorePerformer model is sum-
marized in Table 3. Removing any of the proposed design
choices degrades the quality for all features in almost all
cases. The score encoder adds a local future score context
to the decoder and contributes to a slight quality improve-
ment. The same is true for the additional decoder input
sequence ms, which explicitly highlights the currently ren-
dered score notes. Without style-adaptive layer normaliza-
tion or input-output embedding weight sharing, the corre-
lation for timing features decreases. The most noticeable
quality degradation occurs after using only discrete tokens
without continuous input tokens, demonstrating the posi-
tive impact of value-aware inputs on model predictions.
6.4 Performance Embeddings Analysis
We explore the learned performance style spaces using the
trained performance direction marking classiﬁers. We take
the style embeddings z for note onsets in the dataset and
project them into two dimensions using principal compo-
nent analysis [50]. Figure 3 shows the projected embed-
dings labeled by the selected dynamics, tempo, and ar-
ticulation markings classiﬁers and their ground truth la-
bels. We can see the gradient moving from the light col-
ors (high probabilities) to the darker colors (low probabil-
ities). Despite the class imbalances and low representation
of some labels in the dataset, the positive classiﬁer predic-
tions match the areas of the ground truth labels shown in
the right plots for each marking. This suggests that the vec-
tors for moving the performance toward the markings exist
in the original latent style space and can be used to attempt
to control the performance rendering through the model.
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023

 
pitch
a) z = 0
time, s
pitch
b) z
IO Tempo
Articulation
Velocity
IO Tempo
Articulation
onset
Velocity
GT
Model
 
 
c) bars 5-8: piano, bars 9-12: forte
time, s
 
d) bars 5-8: più mosso, bars 9-12: largo
IO Tempo
Articulation
Velocity
IO Tempo
Articulation
onset
Velocity
GT
Model
 
 
e) bars 5-10: switch cresc.  and dim.
time, s
 
f) pitches 
C4: staccato, <C4: fermata
IO Tempo
Articulation
Velocity
IO Tempo
Articulation
onset
p
f
più mosso
largo
< > < >
<
>
fermata
staccato
Velocity
GT
Model
Figure 2. Pianorolls and performance features (inter-onset tempo, articulation, and velocity) for the ﬁrst 12 musical bars of
Bach’s “Prelude and Fugue No.19”, rendered by ScorePerformer with unconditional or conditional style control. The title
of each plot indicates the form of the control input. Colored areas highlight the regions with the applied control.
Figure 3. Projected style embeddings classiﬁed by chosen
direction marking classiﬁers. The left and right plots for
each marking highlight predicted and ground truth labels.
The direction classiﬁers can also be used to analyze
performance practices. For example, take all performance
contexts with a given notated performance direction mark-
ing and sort them by the classiﬁcation scores using the as-
sociated direction classiﬁer. Further analysis of the score
contexts can provide insight into the reasons why musi-
cians follow or interpret differently certain markings.
6.5 Performance Rendering Control
For performance rendering control, we add control embed-
dings ∆z to the encoded style embeddings and pass them
to the decoder. We analyze both uncontrolled generation
with sampled control embeddings and direction-based con-
trol using the computed delta latents for markings.
Figure 2 shows examples of music performance render-
ing for a composition from the evaluation set. The sample
(a) shows the successful reconstruction of the performance
variations from the encoded style embeddings. When gen-
erated using sampled delta latents (b), the added noise is
transferred to higher variations in tempo than in articula-
tion and dynamics. In our observations, small amounts of
delta noise can result in both pleasant and diverse samples.
From the evaluation of the performance direction based
control, we can see that in most cases the model follows
the musical meaning of the marking. Example (c) shows
that piano and forte delta embeddings lead to the expected
decrease and increase in dynamics. The più mosso (more
movement, faster) and largo (slowly and broadly) in the
example (d) lead to the expected changes in tempo, ar-
ticulation and dynamics. An interesting behaviour can be
found in example (e), where the model values one mark-
ing over the other. During the alternation of crescendo and
diminuendo, the model follows diminuendo more and falls
on the path of slow and quiet performance. The last exam-
ple (f) shows that the control can also be applied effectively
to individual notes. As the deﬁnitions suggest, the staccato
on higher pitched notes makes them more abrupt, and the
fermata on other notes holds the notes a bit longer.
Despite the positive examples of piano performance
rendering control, the model has some limitations. The
proposed marking delta embeddings encode the highest
learned deviations between performance styles and lead to
immediate changes in performance, which can sound un-
natural. One solution is to scale or interpolate the control
inputs for smoother performance changes. Another issue
to be addressed is disentangling the learned latent space
across direction classes for a more controllable generation.
Finally, the study was limited by low performance varia-
tion for some markings and compositions in the dataset.
We believe that the proposed approach has a high potential
for both analytical and musical creativity applications that
could be fulﬁlled with orders of magnitude larger datasets.
7. CONCLUSION
We presented ScorePerformer, an encoder-decoder trans-
former with hierarchical MMD-VAE style encoding heads
for ﬁne-grained controllable expressive rendering of pi-
ano music performances. We also introduced performance
direction classiﬁers, trained on performance style embed-
dings, to map notated direction markings and natural lan-
guage inputs to model control inputs. Evaluation showed
that the model captures performance style variations and
follows control intents. Future work will focus on improv-
ing the diversity of training data to enable large-scale anal-
ysis, and may include in-depth subjective evaluation of the
proposed and existing performance rendering models.
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023

8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Dmitry Yarotsky for his valuable comments dur-
ing the model development and experimentation. We thank
the anonymous reviewers for their critical feedback, which
allowed us to improve the paper. The experiments were
performed on the Zhores computing cluster [51].
9.