This paper proposes a new music source separation (MSS)
model based on an architecture with MLP-Mixer that lever-
ages multilayer perceptrons (MLPs). Most of the recent
MSS techniques are based on architectures with CNNs,
RNNs, and attention-based transformers that take wave-
forms or complex spectrograms or both as inputs.
For
the growth of the research ﬁeld, we believe it is impor-
tant to study not only the current established methodolo-
gies but also diverse perspectives.
Therefore, since the
MLP-Mixer-based architecture has been reported to per-
form as well as or better than architectures with CNNs
and transformers in the computer vision ﬁeld despite the
MLP’s simple computation, we report a way to effec-
tively apply such an architecture to MSS as a reusable in-
sight. In this paper we propose a model called TFC-MLP,
which is a variant of the MLP-Mixer architecture that pre-
serves time-frequency positional relationships and mixes
time, frequency, and channel dimensions separately, us-
ing complex spectrograms as input. The TFC-MLP was
evaluated with source-to-distortion ratio (SDR) using the
MUSDB18-HQ dataset. Experimental results showed that
the proposed model can achieve competitive SDRs when
compared with state-of-the-art MSS models.
1. INTRODUCTION
Music source separation (MSS) is the task of obtaining
individual source signals — such as vocals, drums, and
bass — from real music acoustic signals. This is an es-
sential technique for various applications, including music
information retrieval and music listening interfaces, where
the characteristics of individual sound sources are ana-
lyzed and utilized. MSS has actually been used to add
effects to individual source (instrument) sounds for mu-
sic appreciation [1] and adjust their volume [1–4], to im-
prove the cochlear implant user’s musical experience by
adjusting the volume of preferred instruments [5], to syn-
thesize singing voices [6], to acquire feature expressions of
singing voices [7], to identify singers [8], to achieve audio-
to-lyrics alignment [9,10], to create music mashups [11], to
© T. Nakano and M. Goto. Licensed under a Creative Com-
mons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Attribution:
T. Nakano and M. Goto, “Music source separation with MLP mixing of
time, frequency, and channel”, in Proc. of the 24th Int. Society for Music
Information Retrieval Conf., Milan, Italy, 2023.
separate sources for music education [12], and to estimate
compatibility between vocals and accompaniment [13].
Currently, the mainstream approaches for MSS use
deep neural networks [14, 15], and their performance is
improving year by year. For their performance compar-
ison to measure the improvement, MUSDB18 [16] had
been used as the common standard data set for the four
target sound sources (Vocals, Drums, Bass, and Other).
Then MUSDB18-HQ [17], an extended frequency band-
width version of MUSDB18, was released and has been
used for recent evaluations.
As for the current state-of-the-art MSS models, the top-
ranked models [18, 19] in the Music Demixing (MDX)
Challenge 2021 [20] and the two models presented in
two arXiv papers in 2022 [21, 22] have an average SDR
(source-to-distortion ratio) over 7 dB for the four sources
when using MUSDB18-HQ as training, validation, and test
data. These models are explained in the next section.
Such deep MSS models can be classiﬁed in terms of the
type of input and output used for separation and the type
of architecture. The input and output of the models are se-
lected from waveforms, amplitude spectrograms, complex
spectrograms, phase spectrograms, etc. The architecture
of the models is mainly selected from ResNet, DenseNet,
U-Net, and Transformer and is used with layers of Con-
volutional Neural Networks (CNNs) or Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs). Simpler architectures based on multi-
layer perceptrons (MLPs), however, have not been used in
state-of-the-art MSS models.
Meanwhile, in the ﬁeld of computer vision, high-
performance architectures based on MLPs have recently
been proposed and reported to perform as well as or bet-
ter than architectures using CNNs or transformers [23,24].
In addition, those simpler MLP-centric architectures have
also been applied in audio-related research, with cases of
singing voice synthesis [25] and speech enhancement [26].
However, such MLP-centric architectures have not been
applied in the MSS domain, though fully connected layers
and MLPs have been used for linear transformation such
as embedding and expansion. Since we believe that new
perspectives, in addition to the development of established
methodologies, are important for the advancement of the
research ﬁeld, this paper investigates how MLP-based ar-
chitectures can be effectively leveraged for MSS.
As such a modern MLP-centric high-performance ar-
chitecture, Tolstikhin et al. proposed the MLP-Mixer [23]
that applies MLPs to a Tp × Cp matrix to estimate the

Table 1. SDRs in MUSDB18-HQ for the state-of-the-art models and our proposed TFC-MLP. The “Avg.” column means
the average of the SDR results for the four sources. The “Per-source” column means that the per-source adjustment/tuning
has been implemented. The “Extra” column indicates the number of songs added as extra training data, and † means that
only mixed sounds were added. Models with “*” are evaluated in MUSDB18 [16], and SDRs for models with “**” are
recalculated in MUSDB18-HQ using the pretrained model. A bold font indicates the maximum value at each source.
Model
Test SDR in dB
Name
Per-source
Extra
Avg.
Vocals
Drums
Bass
Other
KUIELab-MDX-Net (w/o Demucs) [18]*
✓
TFC-MLP (ours)
KUIELab-MDX-Net [18]**
✓
Hybrid Transformer Demucs [22]
Hybrid Demucs [19]
Band-Split RNN [21]
✓
TFC-MLP (ours)
Hybrid Demucs [19]
Hybrid Transformer Demucs [22]
Hybrid Transformer Demucs [22]
Band-Split RNN [21]
✓
Hybrid Transformer Demucs [22]
✓
Sparse HT Demucs [22]
✓
class of an image. The matrix is obtained by dividing the
image into patches and embedding each patch into a Tp-
dimensional vector, which is called a token, and the num-
ber of tokens is the channel dimension Cp. Here, a token-
mixing MLP, a full connection within an individual token,
and a channel-mixing MLP, a full connection between to-
kens (i.e., channel direction), are applied alternately. Given
sufﬁcient training data, MLP-Mixer was shown to perform
as well as or better than CNNs or transformers.
By extending this MLP-Mixer, for the image recon-
struction task, Mansour et al. proposed the Image-to-Image
Mixer [24] that performs better when trained with fewer
images than the original MLP-Mixer. The Image-to-Image
Mixer transforms images as a 3D tensor (W × H × C)
instead of the 2D matrix (Tp × Cp) and preserves the rel-
ative positions of patches to induce a bias towards natu-
ral images. In other words, the token-mixing MLP and
the channel-mixing MLP are split into three processes
of width-mixing MLP, height-mixing MLP and channel-
mixing MLP. This also keeps the total number of trainable
parameters low, since the size of each dimension of the 2D
matrix (i.e., Tp and Cp) obtained by transformation from
the 3D tensor is relatively large.
In investigating such MLP-based architectures in the
MSS domain, we decided to use a complex spectrogram,
which is a reasonable representation for MSS, as the input.
Since the size of its complex time-frequency representation
is larger than the size of typical images in the computer
vision domain, we apply the memory-efﬁcient Image-to-
Image Mixer to MSS and report its experimental results.
2. RELATED WORK
As described in Section 1, the state-of-the-art models [18,
19, 21, 22] in the MSS study show that the average SDR
score for the four source separations exceeds 7 dB in the
evaluation using MUSDB18-HQ. The SDRs for each of the
four sources based on these models are shown in Table 1.
KUIELab-MDX-Net was proposed by Kim et al. [18].
It is an architecture that combines an extended version
of TFC-TDF-U-Net [27], which separates in the time-
frequency domain (i.e., complex spectrogram), and De-
mucs [28], which separates in the time domain (i.e., wave-
form).
Each source signal i separated by those sub-
networks is mixed using source-dependent weights wi.
Speciﬁcally, wi was set to 0.5, 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9 for bass,
drums, other, and vocals in MDX Challenge 2021 [20] 1 .
In KUIELab-MDX-Net, to improve performance, a mech-
anism called Mixer was used to remix the music acoustic
signal with the separated signal by using the 1x1 convo-
lution, and different FFT frame sizes were used for each
sound source by applying a frequency cut-off trick [20].
TFC-TDF-U-Net used in the KUIELab-MDX-Net is
a variant of U-Net architecture that combines the time-
frequency convolutions (TFC) block with the time-
distributed fully-connected networks (TDF) block. Here,
TFC is a dense block of 2D CNNs, and TDF is a block that
extracts nonlocal features along the frequency axis, such as
correlations between harmonics, by fully connecting the
entire frequency range of a single frame of the spectro-
gram. TDF was inspired by the Frequency Transformation
Block (FTB) proposed by Yin et al. [29] and was intro-
duced speciﬁcally to help separate singing voices [27]. As
the other component of KUIELab-MDX-Net, Demucs [28]
is a U-Net encoder/decoder structure with waveforms as
input and BiLSTM applied to the innermost layer between
the encoder and decoder to provide long-range context.
Hybrid Demucs was proposed by Défossez et al. [19].
It is a bi-U-Net encoder-decoder model that combines 1D
convolution in the time domain and along the frequency
1 https://github.com/kuielab/mdx-net/blob/
Leaderboard_A/README_SUBMISSION.md
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023

axis in the complex time-frequency domain. BiLSTM and
local attention were used in the innermost layer, and resid-
ual branches, group normalization [30] and GELU were
introduced. In addition, better generalization and stability
were achieved by penalizing the largest singular value in
each layer [31], and overall performance was improved by
bagging multiple models.
Band-Split RNN was proposed by Luo et al. [21]. It is
a state-of-the-art spectrogram-based model that uses com-
plex spectrograms as input and output. By splitting the
complex spectrogram input into subbands speciﬁcally de-
signed for each sound source, the intrinsic properties and
patterns of each source signal are utilized. For a 3D ten-
sor representing the time dimension, frequency dimension,
and subband dimension, similar to the Dual-path RNN
[32], a sequence-level RNN is ﬁrst applied across the time
dimension, then a band-level RNN is applied across the
band dimension. In fact, for Vocals, results showed that the
modiﬁed utterance-level SDR can be improved by more
than 2 dB by setting the bandwidth appropriately. In ad-
dition, semi-supervised ﬁne tuning was performed by us-
ing pseudo-targets separated from the mixtures using a pre-
training model in order to make effective use of songs with
only mixtures (1750 songs). The Band-Split RNN cur-
rently achieves a state-of-the-art SDR of 8.24 dB in the
evaluation using only MUSDB18-HQ as training data.
Hybrid Transformer Demucs was proposed by Rouard
et al. [22].
The innermost layer, called the bottleneck,
of the Hybrid Demucs [19] is replaced by a cross-domain
transformer encoder (i.e., time domain and time-frequency
domain) that uses self-attention within each domain and
cross-attention across domains.
Compared to the Hy-
brid Demucs, the performance is lower when trained with
MUSDB18-HQ only, but the SDR was 0.46 dB better
when 800 additional training songs were used. Sparse HT
Demucs [22], which extended the receptive ﬁeld using a
sparse attention kernel, achieved a state-of-the-art result of
9.27 dB SDR by ﬁne-tuning for each source.
As described above, the MLP-centric architecture has
never been applied in state-of-the-art MSS models where
the average SDR exceeds 7 dB on MUSDB18-HQ.
3. TFC-MLP
This paper proposes Time-Frequency-Channel-MLP (TFC-
MLP), which is a model that leverages the Image-to-Image
Mixer architecture [24] to separate music sources using a
complex spectrogram as input. This is realized by replac-
ing the height, width, and color (RGB) in the image with
the time, frequency, and channel in the complex spectro-
gram, respectively. In other words, TFC-MLP has a struc-
ture that alternates mixing in the time, frequency, and chan-
nel dimensions. In this way, we expect to be able to take
into account the nonlocal structure. Especially with respect
to the frequency dimension, we expect to extract nonlocal
relationships along the frequency axis, such as harmonic
structures, by connecting the entire frequency range of the
spectrogram, as in the FTB [29] and the TDF [27].
The process of the TFC-MLP model is shown in Fig-
ure 1. The complex spectrogram XSTFT ∈CF0×T0×2 of
a 2-channel (stereo) mixture signal is ﬁrst converted to a
4-channel 3D tensor XCaC ∈RF0×T0×4 with the real and
imaginary parts represented as channels, a.k.a. complex-
as-channels (CaC) [27]. Here T0 is a ﬁxed length. Then, as
with the MLP-Mixer and Image-to-Image Mixer as well as
the Vision Transformer (ViT) [33], the patch embedding is
ﬁrst performed using C linear weights of size PT ×PF ×4
(Figure 2). This reduces the frequency dimension F0 to
F0/PF and the time dimension T0 to T0/PT , which re-
duces the matrix size and memory consumption in the fol-
lowing frequency-mixing MLP and time-mixing MLP. To
compensate for the information loss due to decreasing the
resolution in the time-frequency plane and the loss of con-
tinuity in the time-frequency direction, we increase the di-
mension in the channel direction.
The embedded tensor then passes through N MLP-
Mixer layers.
As shown in Figure 3, each MLP-Mixer
layer mixes the tensor with the frequency dimension, then
the time dimension, and ﬁnally the channel dimension.
Such mixing is passed through an MLP consisting of a lin-
ear layer, a GELU nonlinearity, and another linear layer,
and output without changing the tensor size. The dimen-
sion of the tensor at the input/output layer of the MLP is
kept constant, and the dimension at the hidden layer is ad-
justed by multiplying it by a factor f depending on the
input dimension. Skip connections and channel layer nor-
malization have also been added to help with the optimiza-
tion. Here, following the implementation of the Image-to-
Image Mixer [24], skip connections are placed before and
after the two mixing steps of frequency and time (“Type
A”). In addition to that, a version with skip connection and
layer normalization added before time-mixing MLP was
also implemented (“Type B”). After mixing the time, fre-
quency, and channel dimensions, patch expansion is used
to restore the number of time and frequency dimensions for
inverse transformation into waveforms and also to match
the channel dimension to the number of separated sources.
4. EVALUATION
The
proposed
TFC-MLP
was
evaluated
using
the
MUSDB18-HQ dataset [17]. 86 songs were used as train-
ing data, 14 songs as validation data, and 50 songs as test
data. The music acoustic signals were stereo with a sam-
pling frequency of 44.1 kHz, and four sound sources –
“Vocals,” “Drums,” “Bass,” and “Other” – were used for
separation. Separation performance was evaluated by cal-
culating SDR using the museval Python package 2 . As in
most previous studies ( [19, 21], etc.), the SDR of each
source was calculated by taking the median values over all
1-second segments of each song to obtain the SDR of the
track and then taking the median of all tracks.
4.1 Experimental setting
The proposed model was optimized using Adam [34] for
the L1 loss between its separated signals and the ground-
2 https://github.com/sigsep/sigsep-mus-eval
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023

4 ch
Stereo signal
CaC spectrogram
TFC-MLP
Separated source signals
Drums
Bass
Other
Vocals
Patch
embedding
Patch
expansion
N x (Mixer layer)
T  frames
F
bins
Figure 1. Overview of the TFC-MLP model.
T  frames
T
F
C
F
bins
4 ch
4 ch
C linear weights
Patch embedding
P
PT
F
Input
Output
...
Figure 2. Patch embedding. After dividing the CaC tensor
of size F0 × T0 × 4 into patches of size PF × PT × 4, each
patch was linearly transformed into 1 × 1 × C to obtain a
3D tensor of size F0/PF × T0/PT × C (i.e., F × T × C).
This can be implemented as a nonoverlapping CNN.
truth source signals. The Adam parameters were set as
no weight decay, learning rate 0.0003, β1 = 0.9, and
β2 = 0.999. The waveform for calculating the CaC spec-
trogram to be input to the model was normalized so that
the mean amplitude of the music acoustic signal was 0 and
the standard deviation was 1. The training was distributed
across multiple GPUs, with a batch size of 4 on each GPU.
In training, we used data augmentation techniques [19], in-
cluding pitch shift and tempo stretch, randomly swapping
channels, random sign ﬂip, random scaling of amplitude,
and remixing of stems within one batch.
4.2 Base hyperparameters
Due to the many hyperparameters required for the building
of the proposed TFC-MLP model, hyperparameters related
to the short-time Fourier transform (STFT) were ﬁrst deter-
mined through preliminary experiments. To obtain XCaC,
the STFT frame size (i.e., FFT size) was chosen as 4096,
which had the highest SDR when compared among 512,
As Kim et al. [18] also stated,
the performance tended to increase with larger FFT size.
Therefore the frequency dimension F0 is 2048. Related to
the FFT size, the STFT hop size was investigated among
128, 256, 512, and 1024, and 1024 was selected. Also re-
lated to the FFT size and STFT hop size, the number of
time frames T0 in the complex spectrogram was selected
The number of time frames T0 of 128 based on an FFT
size of 4096 and an STFT hop size of 1024 is input to the
model, thus the waveform size required for this is equal
to Tw = 1024 × 128 −1 (about 3 seconds). Therefore,
it is necessary to train the model while cutting out an ap-
Mixer layer (Type B)
Mixing MLPs
Frequency-mixing MLP
Time-mixing MLP
Channel-mixing MLP
Input dim.
Hidden dim.
Output dim.
skip connections
skip connections
skip connections
skip connections
skip connections
Layer
norm
Freq.
mixing
Time
mixing
Layer
norm
Channel
mixing
Layer
norm
Layer
norm
Layer
norm
Freq.
mixing
Time
mixing
Channel
mixing
Mixer layer (Type A)
F
F
f F
T
T
f T
C
C
f C
Fully
connected
Fully
connected
GELU
Figure 3. The Mixer layer contains one frequency-mixing
MLP, one time-mixing MLP, and one channel-mixing
MLP. Before each MLP, a transposition is performed to
apply the MLP to the frequency dimension F, the time di-
mension T, and the channel dimension C. Transposition
is also performed before every layer normalization to nor-
malize along the channel dimension C.
proximately 3-second segment of the waveform, and the
shift size of 16384 (about 0.37 seconds) was used. Luo
et al. [21] found that the shorter the shift, the better the
modiﬁed utterance-level SDR, and they used 0.5 seconds.
The above 16384 is short enough compared to 0.5 seconds
and can be considered sufﬁcient in this study.
As hyperparameters regarding the model, the dimen-
sions C of the patch embedding were investigated by us.
Speciﬁcally, 128 and 256 were investigated and 256 was
selected. As hyperparameters related to the Mixer layer, 8
and 16 were investigated as the number of layers N and 16
was selected, and the parameter f for adjusting the num-
ber of dimensions of the hidden layer of each MLP was
selected as 4 from 1, 2, and 4. Dropout in the MLP [25]
and skip connections before and after the Mixer layer were
also investigated, but they have not yielded better results.
4.3 Experiment
Using the set of hyperparameters determined in Section 4.2
as a basis, we report the SDR scores obtained under the fol-
lowing various conditions for the other hyperparameters.
• Investigation of the results of complex spectrogram
loss [21].
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023

Table 2. SDRs for different hyperparameters of the proposed model. The “Seed” column indicates random seeds. In the
“Loss” column, “W” indicates that only waveform loss was used, and “W+S” indicates that complex spectral loss was
added. The “Epoch” column indicates the number of epochs with the smallest validation loss and the speciﬁed number
of epochs, where “*” means that validation loss was not considered. Note that “†” means the cases where the number of
epochs with the smallest validation loss did not change when training beyond 200 epochs (i.e., the same model was used
for the evaluation). A bold font indicates the maximum value at each source, both without and with extra training songs.
TFC-MLP
Test SDR in dB
Type
Seed
(PF , PT )
Loss
Epoch
Extra
Avg.
Vocals
Drums
Bass
Other
A
seed 1
(4, 4)
W
A
seed 2
(4, 4)
W
A
seed 3
(4, 4)
W
A
seed 3
(4, 4)
W
B
seed 1
(4, 4)
W
B
seed 2
(4, 4)
W
B
seed 3
(4, 4)
W
A
seed 1
(2, 2)
W
A
seed 1
(1, 1)
W
A
seed 1
(4, 4)
W+S
A
seed 1
(4, 4)
W+S
A
seed 1
(4, 4)
W
A
seed 1
(4, 4)
W
Table 3. The number of model parameters and the average
Real Time Factor (RTF) value. The Hybrid Transformer
Demucs is denoted as “HT Demucs”.
Column “GPU”
shows the RTF with a single GPU, and column “CPU”
shows the RTF under the condition without a GPU.
Model
GPU
CPU
Params.
Hybrid Demucs
HT Demucs
TFC-MLP
• Investigation of patch size (PF , PT ) between (4, 4),
(2, 2), and (1, 1), using (4, 4) as the basis, halving
the FFT size and time dimension T for (2, 2), and
halving it further for (1, 1). For (1, 1), the STFT hop
size was set to 512 since the FFT size is 1024.
• The number of epochs for training was set to 200
or 300, and models with the smallest validation loss
within each epoch-condition were evaluated.
• The results of adding 120 full-length songs (sung in
English) to the training data were evaluated.
• For the basic parameter condition, we trained three
times with different random seeds.
In the test phase, the model with the smallest validation
loss was used for evaluation in each training condition. The
signal separated by the proposed model was divided into
segments of ﬁxed length Tw with shift width Tw/4, which
were weighted overlap-added to obtain the ﬁnal signal. In
addition, the shift trick [28] was performed 10 times.
4.4 Results and discussions
In
addition
to
the
evaluation
of
SDRs
using
the
MUSDB18-HQ test set, the number of parameters and the
Real Time Factor (RTF) will also be discussed, as ﬁle size
and the time required for separation may be important in
some situations depending on how the MSS model is used.
4.4.1 SDRs
The experimental results are shown in Table 2. The high-
est SDR score, up to 7.30 dB, was obtained for the Type
A model using the patch size of (4, 4) and waveform L1
loss in addition to the base hyperparameters. This was not
signiﬁcantly higher than the state-of-the-art values shown
in Table 1, but close performance was achieved.
Focusing on the results for each source with respect to
our TFC-MLP, as shown in Table 1, the SDRs for Vocals
and Other were 8.91 dB and 6.14 dB, respectively, which
were higher than the 8.35 dB and 5.65 dB SDRs for the
Hybrid Demucs and the 7.93 dB and 5.72 dB SDRs for
the Hybrid Transformer Demucs. This model’s SDR score
for Other also exceeded the one obtained using KUIELab-
MDX-Net, 5.90. Here, in comparison to the KUIELab-
MDX-Net results without waveform information (i.e., ex-
cluding processing by Demucs), it is possible that similar
or better performance was obtained for Drums and Vocals,
although an exact comparison cannot be made because the
test data is different (i.e., MUSDB18 was used). In com-
parison to the Band-Split RNN results, TFC-MLP could
not yield a higher SDR for all sound sources. However,
the current TFC-MLP does not include a source-speciﬁc
framework, so addressing this issue is a future challenge.
As for the patch size, the FFT size and other condi-
tions were different due to memory capacity. Therefore, al-
though exact comparisons are not possible, the best results
were obtained for (4, 4) in the current results. However, ad-
ditional study is needed for (2, 2), since it gave results sim-
ilar to those given by (4, 4). As for complex spectrogram
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023

loss, its SDR was slightly lower than that of all conditions
using only waveform loss. Not only comparisons using the
real and imaginary parts of the complex numbers, but also
losses based on amplitude and phase could be considered.
We also showed that the performance of the models was
further improved by using additional training data.
As
shown in Table 1, compared to the current world’s best
model Sparse HT Demucs with 800 songs added as the
training data, we obtained competitive results with an SDR
of 9.68 dB for the Vocals and 6.46 dB for the Others.
4.4.2 RTF and the number of parameters
As comparison, models were trained for each of the Hy-
brid Demucs and Hybrid Transformer Demucs.
Based
on the published source codes, a model parameter setting
“80a68df8” 3 was used for Hybrid Demucs, and the default
parameter setting was used for Hybrid Transformer De-
mucs. The same implementation for audio synthesis was
used for all TFC-MLP, Hybrid Demucs, and Hybrid Trans-
former Demucs. We used the 50 songs in the MUSDB18-
HQ test set to obtain the average of their RTFs.
Table 3 shows the results. The RTF values of TFC-MLP
were slower than the other two models. TFC-MLP had an
RTF lower than 1.0 (faster than real time) when a GPU
was used, but the computation time was long without GPU.
This could be due to the large size of the time-frequency
spectrogram.
As for the number of model parameters,
TFC-MLP had more parameters than Hybrid Transformer
Demucs, but fewer parameters than Hybrid Demucs.
4.4.3 Comparison with the state-of-the-art models
The proposed TFC-MLP model has some similarities to
the state-of-the-art MSS models, which potentially have
led to the competitive performance achieved.
• The frequency-mixing MLP is similar to the full
connection of frequency dimensions in TDF [27]
and the band-level RNN applied across band dimen-
sions in Band-Split RNN [21].
• The time-mixing MLP is similar to the sequence-
level RNNs applied across time dimensions in Band-
Split RNN [21].
• Increasing the number of the channel dimensions
through patch embedding and increasing the number
of hidden layer dimensions in MLP are techniques
that are usually used regardless of MSS. For MSS,
the improvement is potentially related to the increase
in channel dimensionality in the encoder part, such
as Hybrid Transformer Demucs [22].
• The extra training data improved performance in the
state-of-the-art models, and we conﬁrmed the per-
formance improvement with extra training data in
TFC-MLP as well.
On the other hand, the following are included in the
existing state-of-the-art MSS models but not currently in-
cluded in our TFC-MLP. They have the potential to im-
prove performance when applied in the future.
3 https://github.com/facebookresearch/demucs/
blob/main/docs/training.md
• As presented by Défossez et al. [19] and Kim
et al. [18], a hybrid approach that also considers
waveforms could improve performance.
• As Kim et al. [18], Luo et al. [21], and Rouard
et al. [22] have shown, the introduction of source-
speciﬁc techniques, such as band splitting, could im-
prove separation performance.
• Deep learning techniques such as model selection
methods (e.g., exponential moving average), train-
ing stabilization (e.g., singular value decomposition
and sparsiﬁcation), and the introduction of a learning
rate scheduler could further improve performance.
Finally, to the best of our knowledge, there are no stud-
ies that mix the channel dimension with the time and fre-
quency dimensions as in TFC-MLP. Such a mixer layer
used in the TFC-MLP architecture has the advantage of re-
ducing the overall memory usage compared to the original
MLP-Mixer, just as the Image-to-Image Mixer reduced the
memory usage. This reusable insight of mixing the chan-
nel dimension separately could be useful for other studies
that have dealt with the time and frequency dimensions so
far, but could be extended to the channel dimension.
4.4.4 Future directions
As future work, we plan to improve the performance of
TFC-MLP by incorporating the ideas discussed above and
further exploring more optimal hyperparameters. For ex-
ample, increasing the FFT window size by utilizing fre-
quency cut-off trick [20] is expected to improve the perfor-
mance. Automatic optimization of hyperparameters could
also be incorporated.
Future work will also include the visualization of the
inside of TFC-MLP for analysis. We could visualize the
linear weights used in the patch embedding by converting
them back to complex numbers and then calculating their
amplitudes. The visualized results could allow us to ana-
lyze what local patterns the model is focusing on. How-
ever, when we tried it, it was difﬁcult to understand the
behavior of the mixer layer due to the mixing of real and
imaginary parts during the patch embedding. We are there-
fore interested in using the amplitude and phase (group de-
lay) instead of the real and imaginary parts so that we can
analyze the model in a more comprehensive way.
5. CONCLUSION
This paper has described a new MSS architecture called
TFC-MLP that uses complex spectrograms as input. Our
contributions are summarized as follows:
(1) We proposed a simpler MLP-centric MSS architecture
that achieves competitive performance compared to
state-of-the-art models.
(2) We reported on some hyperparameter searches that
will be useful for other researchers exploring this
type of architecture.
(3) We discussed the similarities and differences between
the state-of-the-art models and TFC-MLP, and sug-
gested directions for future research.
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by JST CREST Grant
Number JPMJCR20D4 and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber JP21H04917, Japan.
7.