We propose Beat Transformer, a novel Transformer en-
coder architecture for joint beat and downbeat tracking.
Different from previous models that track beats solely
based on the spectrogram of an audio mixture, our model
deals with demixed spectrograms with multiple instrument
channels. This is inspired by the fact that humans perceive
metrical structures from richer musical contexts, such as
chord progression and instrumentation. To this end, we
develop a Transformer model with both time-wise atten-
tion and instrument-wise attention to capture deep-buried
metrical cues. Moreover, our model adopts a novel dilated
self-attention mechanism, which achieves powerful hierar-
chical modelling with only linear complexity. Experiments
demonstrate a significant improvement in demixed beat
tracking over the non-demixed version. Also, Beat Trans-
former achieves up to 4% point improvement in downbeat
tracking accuracy over the TCN architectures. We further
discover an interpretable attention pattern that mirrors our
understanding of hierarchical metrical structures.
1. INTRODUCTION
Music audio beat and downbeat tracking, which aims
to infer the very basic metrical structure of music, is a
long-standing central topic in music information retrieval
(MIR). A good beat estimation benefits various down-
stream MIR tasks, including transcription and structure
analysis [1±5]. Moreover, beat tracking can be applied to
human-computer interaction [6,7], music therapy [8], and
more scenes, as beats echo with human perceptual and mo-
tor sensitivity to musical rhythms.
We see significant progress in beat tracking with the de-
velopment of deep neural networks. Current mainstream
methods utilize temporal convolutional networks (TCNs)
to extract frame-wise beat activations from an input spec-
trogram [9]. We further see successful efforts in boosting
beat tracking performance, including phase-informed post-
processing with dynamic Bayesian networks (DBNs) [10],
© J. Zhao, G. Xia, and Y. Wang. Licensed under a Cre-
ative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). At-
tribution: J. Zhao, G. Xia, and Y. Wang, ªBeat Transformer: Demixed
Beat and Downbeat Tracking with Dilated Self-Attentionº, in Proc. of
the 23rd Int. Society for Music Information Retrieval Conf., Bengaluru,
India, 2022.
multi-task learning for joint beat, downbeat and tempo es-
timation [11±13], and explicit beat phase modelling [14].
Recently, Transformer has demonstrated highly com-
petitive performances over a range of MIR tasks [15±21].
In this paper, we propose Beat Transformer, a novel Trans-
former encoder architecture for joint beat and downbeat
tracking. To better accommodate Transformer to our pur-
pose, we introduce two extra inductive biases.
Firstly,
our model is constructed with short-windowed dilated self-
attention.
An exponentially increasing dilation rate en-
ables our model to discern beats from non-beats in a hi-
erarchical manner. With a fixed window size, our model
maintains a linear complexity to the input sequence length.
Another inductive bias is demixed beat tracking. This
strategy is inspired by the fact that human beat tracking
is always accompanied by and enhanced by a deep under-
standing of the musical contexts. For example, the coor-
dination of instruments enforces the progression of chords
and bass notes, thus implying metrical accents, and such
cues can be easily identified by human listeners. To capture
this relation, we use Spleeter [22] to demix an input mu-
sic piece into multiple instrument channels, and our model
performs both time-wise and instrument-wise attention in
alternate Transformer layers to excavate metrical cues.
We evaluate Beat Transformer on a wide range of
beat- and downbeat-annotated datasets. Besides competing
with state-of-the-art works, we present a thorough ablation
study to illustrate the effectiveness of dilated self-attention
and demixing. Moreover, our model learns highly inter-
pretable representations. We demonstrate that our model
can be interpreted as a learner over finite-state Markov
chains, and we observe beat phase transition through vi-
sualization of the transition (attention) matrix.
In brief, the contributions of our paper are as follows:
• We propose Beat Transformer 1 , a novel Trans-
former encoder architecture for joint beat and down-
beat tracking in music audio.
• We devise dilated self-attention, which demonstrates
powerful sequential modelling with linear complex-
ity, potentially adaptable to more general MIR tasks.
• We make use of music demixing to complement and
enhance beat tracking, shedding light on future MIR
research towards universal music understanding.
1 Available at https://github.com/zhaojw1998/Beat-Transformer.

2. RELATED WORKS
We review two topics related to our work: beat tracking,
and Transformer. For beat tracking, we focus on its devel-
opment with deep neural networks. For Transformer, we
address its application in MIR. For more general review of
both topics, we refer readers to [23] and [24], respectively.
2.1 Music Audio Beat Tracking
Beat tracking has been formulated as a two-stage sequen-
tial learning task. The first stage aims to determine the
likelihood of beat presence, or beat activation, at each
frame of an input spectrogram. The initial deep learning
approach for this purpose was based on long short-term
memory networks (LSTM) [25, 26]. To better pick up the
beat sequence from raw model output, at the second stage,
a dynamic Baysian network (DBN) is introduced to infer
tempo and beat phase transition from beat activation [10].
The current mainstream methods substitute the LSTM
with a TCN architecture [9, 12±15]. Specifically, the con-
volutional kernels have a dilation rate exponential to the
depth of layer. This hierarchical structure facilitates the
network to model various scales, functionally similar to
pooling, but maintains the same input and output size
[27]. Besides architecture, another breakthrough of beat
tracking is the formulation of multi-task learning [11±15].
Specifically, beat, downbeat, and tempo are strongly corre-
lated metrical features. Sharing model weights among all
three sub-tasks helps each to reach better convergence.
A recent trend of beat tracking is to deal with demixed
music sources. Chiu et. al. leverages demixed drum and
non-drum streams to enhance model adaptability to differ-
ent drum source conditions [28, 29]. In fact, humans can
track beats while switching their attention among different
instrument parts. Hence the coordination of instrumental
sources can be explored for useful metrical information.
In our work, we inherit the fashion of multi-task learn-
ing and the use of DBN, while proposing a novel Trans-
former encoder architecture to replace TCN. We formal-
ize dilated self-attention [30, 31] for efficient modeling of
long metrical structures. Moreover, we seek to enhance
beat tracking by introducing instrumental attention among
drum, piano, bass, vocal, and other demixed sources.
2.2 Transformer in MIR
Transformer has established itself de facto state-of-the-
art in natural language and symbolic music domain. Re-
cently, it has also demonstrated outstanding performance
over audio-based MIR tasks, including music transcription
[17±19], music tagging [20, 21], and other analysis [16].
For these tasks, a Transformer model is trained over short
spectrogram clips typically of 2-5 seconds as a compro-
mise to the quadratic complexity computing self-attention.
Transformer is first applied to beat tracking by Hung et.
al. [15] using SpecTNT blocks [16]. For each SpecTNT
block, a spectral Transformer encoder first aggregates
spectral information at each time step, and then a temporal
encoder exchanges information in time and pays attention
to beat and downbeat positions. Such a time-frequency
design makes an effective use of spectral features and
achieves the state-of-the-art performance.
Our work is also a Transformer-based architecture that
strives to enhance beat tracking with richer musical con-
texts. Instead of aggregating spectral features as in [15],
we resort to demixed instrumental attention as a more ex-
plicit inductive bias to exploring spectral information. Our
design of dilated self-attention is also a crucial step to ac-
commodate Transformer to beat tracking. With only linear
complexity, our model handles full-length songs at a time.
3. METHOD
The core of our method is a Transformer encoder based on
1) dilated self-attention (DSA), and 2) demixed instrumen-
tal attention, to extract a framewise beat activation from
input spectrograms. In this section, we first formalize DSA
in Section 3.1. We then present our design of demixed beat
tracking in Section 3.2. We further interpret our method
with Markov chain properties in Section 3.3.
3.1 Dilated Self-Attention (DSA)
3.1.1 Background of Self-Attention (SA)
We first recall that, for vanilla Transformer layers, self-
attention (SA) is computed via the scaled dot product:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QK⊤
√df
)V,
(1)
where Q1:T , K1:T , V1:T ∈RT ×df are query, key, and value
sequences, each linearly mapped from input x1:T . T is the
sequence length, and df is the feature dimension.
The partial attention from position i to j is explicitly:
eij = QiK⊤
j
√df
,
(2)
where 1 ≤i, j ≤T. Such computation leads to quadratic
complexity O(T 2) in terms of both time and space.
3.1.2 Dilated Self-Attention (DSA)
An illustration of DSA is shown in Figure 1. DSA is com-
puted over a short window of size lwin = m + n + 1,
where m and n are the length of non-causal and causal
components of the window (in Figure 1, m = n = 2).
Each Transformer layer has a dilation rate r ⩾1, and r
increases exponentially as the layer goes deeper.
Formally, given Q, K, and V ∈RT ×df, DSA first com-
putes Q-K attention by:
eik = QiK⊤
i+rk
√df
,
(3)
where 1 ≤i ≤T and −m ≤k ≤n. Specifically, i + rk
refers to the positions in K1:T that are attainable by Qi
under the dilated window of rate r. When i + rk exceeds
the sequence range [1, T], we fill eik with −inf.
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

Layer 1 
Dilation 20
Layer 2 
Dilation 21
Layer 3 
Dilation 22
(a) Layer-wise view of dilated self-attention (Adapted from TCN structures [9,27])
𝐾𝐾𝑗𝑗
𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖
(b) Attention matrix view at layer 2
Figure 1: Illustration of dilated self-attention (with a non-causal short window of size 5) over a three-layer Transformer.
Part (a) shows the hierarchical connectivity across layers, which shares the same pattern as TCN in [9]. Part (b) shows the
attention matrix at layer 2, with colours indicating relative position. The white colour indicates unattainable positions.
𝑄𝑄1:𝑇𝑇
𝐾𝐾/𝑉𝑉
rolling and 
concatenation
Padded 𝐾𝐾/𝑉𝑉
Figure 2: Illustration of efficient DSA implementation,
with dilation rate r = 2 and window size lwin = 5.
Then, the Q-K attention eik is normalized via softmax:
pik =
exp(eik)
Pn
k=−m exp(eik)
(4)
The output of DSA is a sequence z1:T , where zi is the
weighted average of V under the same dilated window:
zi =
n
X
k=−m
pik(Vi+rk)
(5)
We apply DSA with exponentially increasing dilation
rates and relative positional embedding (RPE) [32] to a
stack of Transformer layers. Each layer consists of two
sub-layers: DSA, and a position-wise feed-forward layer.
We place residual connections across each sub-layer and
perform layer normalization [33] before each sub-layer.
3.1.3 Memory Efficient Implementation of DSA
A straightforward implementation of DSA is to mask SA.
Concretely, a square mask takes the same form as in Figure
1b, where all uncolored positions are filled with −inf, ren-
dering a rather sparse attention matrix. This way, however,
still requires quadratic complexity, because eij is explicitly
computed for all masked positions.
Our implementation takes a ªrollingº strategy to elimi-
nate redundant computation. As in Figure 2, lwin copies of
K1:T sequences are padded and rolled along the time axis,
and then concatenated on a new axis. In this way, each Qi
sees Kj directly and only at j = i + rk for −m ≤k ≤n,
which is exactly the coverage of the dilated window.
Formally, given K1:T ∈RT ×df, dilation rate r, and
window size lwin, the rolling strategy takes three steps:
Temporal Transformer Layer 
with DSA
⋯⋯
𝑇𝑇
vocal
piano
drum
bass
Instrumental 
Transformer 
Layer with SA
other
Demixed
Transformer 
Block 
Figure 3: Demixed Transformer block. Two Transformer
layers are stacked ªorthogonallyº, each handling time-wise
dilated self-attention and instrument-wise self-attention.
1. Pad K1:T with ⌊lwin
2 ⌋× r steps on both sides;
2. Make lwin copies of padded K. Starting from 0, each
copy is cyclically rolled r more steps;
3. Concatenate each copy along a new axis and retrieve
the first T steps. The output has shape T ×lwin ×df.
The same procedure applies to V1:T as well. In this way,
computing DSA is essentially as simple as Equation (1).
Here, instead of Q, K, V ∈RT ×df, we have Q ∈RT ×1×df
and K, V ∈RT ×lwin×df, with T treated as a batch dimen-
sion. The computation complexity is O(T × lwin), while
lwin is fixed and small enough to be left uncounted.
3.2 Demixed Beat Tracking
3.2.1 Demixed Transformer Block
We use Spleeter 5-stems model [22] to demix an in-
put piece into spectrograms with |C| instrument chan-
nels, where C = {vocal, piano, drum, bass, other}. As
shown in Figure 3, we stack two Transformer layers to per-
form time-wise and instrument-wise attention in turn. Let
the input at layer l be xl
1:T,1:|C| ∈RT ×|C|×df, a temporal
Transformer layer (TTL) first takes xl
1:T,c for 1 ≤c ≤|C|:
xl+1
1:T,c = TTL(xl
1:T,c)
(6)
Then, an instrumental Transformer layer (ITL), on the
orthogonal direction, takes xl+1
t,1:|C| for 1 ≤t ≤T:
xl+2
t,1:|C| = ITL(xl+1
t,1:|C|)
(7)
A TTL followed by ITL forms a demixed Transformer
block. TTL consists of DSA as described in Section 3.1.2.
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

DSA (temporal)
Feed-Forward
DSA (temporal)
Feed-Forward
DSA (temporal)
Feed-Forward
Linear & Sigmoid
DBN
Temporal 
Pooling
Beat
Downbeat
Tempo
×3
×3
×3
Convolution & Pooling
Demixing
Transformer Layers
Post-Processing
Pre-Processing
𝑇𝑇
𝐹𝐹= 128
𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇
vocal
piano
drum
bass
other
SA (instrumental)
Feed-Forward
Demixed Transformer Block
Figure 4: Beat Transformer architecture. For conciseness, layer normalization and dropout layers are not shown.
For ITL, we use vanilla SA because there is only 5 in-
strument channels. As instruments are not sequentially or-
dered, we do not add any positional encoding to ITL.
Through demixed Transformer blocks, our model can
capture the rhythmic evolution of each instrument, as well
as the harmonic coordination among all instruments.
3.2.2 Partial Demix Augmentation
Spleeter may produce empty channels when a certain in-
strument does not present. To avoid potential effects of
such a situations, we develop a partial demix strategy for
data augmentation. Partial demix creates new stems by
summing up existing instrument channels of a default 5-
stem demixed input sample. For example, an augmented
data sample may have three channels corresponding to
C′ = {vocal&piano, drum, bass&other}.
In our case, we randomly sum up 2, 3, or 4 instrument
channels of a 5-stem input with a probability 30%, 10%,
and 10% during training. In this way, our model is encour-
aged to pay attention to instrument-agnostic musical con-
tents and thus is less affected by empty channels where no
valid music content is present. As our augmentation strat-
egy also adds to the demix diversity and the data quantity,
we believe it brings general benefits to training as well.
3.3 Markov Chain Interpretation
In Equation (4), we formulate the attention matrix of DSA
as P = [pij]1≤i,j≤T , where pij ≥0 if and only if j =
i + rk for −m ≤k ≤n. Here, r is the dilation rate, and
m, n are components of the attention window. Moreover,
P satisfies PT
j=1 pij = 1 for all i. Therefore, P can be
regarded as the transition matrix of a finite-state Markov
chain, where each state is a position of the input sequence.
For a stack of temporal Transformer layers (TTL),
where DSA is employed, layer l essentially learns a unique
one-step transition P l, by which our model can attend
to local neighbours covered by the attention window.
Through L layers, our model makes an L-step transition,
during which it attends to global positions hierarchically.
The overall L-step transition matrix P (L) satisfies:
P (L) =
L
Y
l=1
P l
(8)
Note that P l itself is a rather sparse matrix (due to short
attention window), while P (L) is densely connected. Its
components [p(L)
ij ]1≤i,j≤T represent the hierarchical atten-
tion weights across the whole L layers, which can tell us
much richer attention patterns (more in Section 4.4).
3.4 Complete Architecture
A complete view of Beat Transformer is presented in Fig-
ure 4. The inputs are log-scaled spectrograms demixed by
Spleeter, with F = 128 mel-bins and |C| = 5 instrument
channels. Subject to Spleeter, our frame rate is 43.07 fps
and the frequency range is up to 11 kHz. We then use three
2D convolutional layers, shared by each demixed channel,
as a front-end feature extractor. The convolutional design
is the same as in [13] except that we employ more filters to
reach feature dimension dmodel = 256.
Beat Transformer comprises 9 temporal Transformer
layers (TTL) with DSA. Each TTL has 8 attention heads
with window size lwin = 5, four of which have skewed
window ranges, where m = 0, 1, 3, 4, respectively, and
n = 4 −m. The dilation rate grows exponentially from
20 to 28, stretching to a receptive field of 47.51 seconds.
Among the 9 TTLs, the middle three are expanded to
demixed Transformer blocks by interleaving ITLs.
We
found it sufficient to perform instrumental attention only in
the middle layers, which has a proper scale of 1-5 seconds.
Each Transformer layer has 8 heads (df = 32) followed by
a feed-forward layer with hidden dimension dff = 1024.
We sum up the instrument channels of the output of the
last Transformer layer and obtain a frame-wise beat rep-
resentation of shape T × dmodel.
Following multi-task
learning practice [11±14], we use a linear layer to map
the representation to beat and downbeat activations respec-
tively, and add a regularization branch predicting global
tempo via ªskip connectionsº [12].
We apply DBN in
Madmom package [34] as the post-processor to pick up
the beat and downbeat sequence from raw activations. For
DBN parameters, we set observation_lambda = 6,
transition_lambda = 100, and threshold = 0.2.
4. EXPERIMENTS
4.1 Datasets
We utilize a total of 7 datasets for model training and
evaluation:
Ballroom [35, 36], Hainsworth [37], RWC
Popular [38], Harmonix [39], Carnetic [40], SMC [41],
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

Beat Accuracy
Downbeat Accuracy
Dataset
Model
F-Measure
CMLt
AMLt
F-Measure
CMLt
AMLt
Ballroom
TCN+Demix
Ours w/o Demix
Ours w/o Aug.
Ours
Böck et al. [13]
Hung et al. [15]
Hainsworth
TCN+Demix
Ours w/o Demix
Ours w/o Aug.
Ours
Böck et al. [13]
Hung et al. [15]
Harmonix
TCN+Demix
Ours w/o Demix
Ours w/o Aug.
Ours
Böck et al. [13]∗
Hung et al. [15]
SMC
TCN+Demix
Ours w/o Demix
Ours w/o Aug.
Ours
Böck et al. [13]
Hung et al. [15]
GTZAN
TCN+Demix
Ours w/o Demix
Ours w/o Aug.
Ours
Böck et al. [13]
Hung et al. [15]
Table 1: Testing results of beat and downbeat tracking under 8-fold cross-validation. GTZAN is unseen from training and
held out for test only. Böck et. al. [13] on Harmonix is reproduced by [15], as indicated by the ∗symbol. We use underscore
to denote best results comparing with our ablation models and use boldface to compare with state-of-the-art models.
and GTZAN [42, 43].
We acquire Harmonix in mel-
spectrogram and invert each piece to audio using Griffin-
Lim Algorithm [44, 45] with Librosa package [46]. Fol-
lowing convention, we leave GTZAN for testing only and
use the other datasets in 8-fold cross validation [11±13].
4.2 Training
Our model is supervised in a multi-task learning fashion,
where beat, downbeat, and tempo are predicted jointly
[13]. Beat and downbeat annotations are each represented
as a 1D binary sequence that indicates beat (1) and non-
beat (0) states at each input frame. Following [13], we
widen beat and downbeat states to ±2 neighbours of an-
notated frames with weights 0.5 and 0.25. Following [12],
we derive tempo target from beat annotation for the tempo
prediction branch. We found the use of tempo branch gen-
erally beneficial to beat tracking, as it may serve as a regu-
larization term that helps reaching better convergence.
For training, we combine the binary cross entropy loss
over beat, downbeat, and tempo by weighing them equally.
We use a batch size of 1 to train on whole sequences with
different lengths. For excessively long songs, we split them
into 3-minute (8k-frame) clips. We apply RAdam [47] plus
Lookahead [48] optimizer with an initial learning rate of
1e−3, which is reduced by a factor of 5 whenever the val-
idation loss gets stuck for 2 epochs before being capped at
a minimum value of 1e−7. We use dropout [49] with rate
0.5 for the tempo branch and 0.1 for other parts of the net-
work. We apply partial demix augmentation described in
Section 3.2.2 as the only means of data augmentation. Our
model has 9.29M trainable parameters and is trained with
an RTX-A5000-24GB GPU. Each training fold generally
takes 20 epochs (in 11 hours) to fully converge.
4.3 Evaluation
4.3.1 Baseline Methods
We first compare three ablation models to validate our
module design. The first ablation model is Ours trained
without partial demix augmentation (Ours w/o Aug.). The
second model removes all ITL layers and tracks beat with a
single channel of non-demixed mixture (Ours w/o Demix).
The last model replaces each TTL layer with a TCN layer
[13] of the same dilation rate (TCN+Demix). We imple-
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

𝑏𝑘𝑏𝑘𝑏𝑘
𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖
𝐾𝐾𝑗𝑗
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘+1
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘−1
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘−1
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘+1
(a) P (1) lower scale𝑏𝑘𝑏𝑘𝑏𝑘
𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖
𝐾𝐾𝑗𝑗
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘+1
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘−1
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘−1
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘
𝑏𝑏𝑘𝑘+1
(b) P (3) beat scale𝑑𝑘𝑑𝑘𝑑𝑘
𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖
𝐾𝐾𝑗𝑗
𝑑𝑑𝑘𝑘
𝑑𝑑𝑘𝑘+1
𝑑𝑑𝑘𝑘−1
𝑑𝑑𝑘𝑘−1
𝑑𝑑𝑘𝑘
𝑑𝑑𝑘𝑘+1
(c) P (5) downbeat scale
𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖
𝐾𝐾𝑗𝑗
(d) P (9) higher scale
Figure 5: Visualization of temporal attention matrix based on the product rule in Equation (8) for L-step transition on a
Markov chain. L = 1, 3, 5, and 9 from part (a) to (d), which model different hierarchies of the metrical structure.
ment TCN layers following [23] while setting the input and
output shape to be the same as our model. The resulting
model yields a comparable amount of 10.25M parameters
and is trained without augmentation.
In addition, we compare our model with two recent
works that have achieved state-of-the-art performance.
Specifically, Böck et al. [13] is based on TCN architectures
and Hung et al. [15] is based on SpecTNT.
4.3.2 Results and Discussion
In Table 1, we first observe Ours w/o Aug. yields gener-
ally better performance than TCN+Demix, especially on
the unseen GTZAN dataset. As both models share a com-
parable amount of parameters, this result demonstrates the
capability of Transformer (DSA) versus TCN (dilated con-
volution), which also corroborates with previous findings
on Transformer’s comparability to convolution on general
tasks [50±52]. Considering that Transformer is notoriously
data-inefficient to train, it is remarkable that our model is
well-trained with limited data without augmentation. We
owe this merit to DSA, which not only prevents redundant
computation but also makes musical sense in terms of the
hierarchical structure of music metrical modelling.
Comparing Ours w/o Demix to Ours w/o Aug., while
both models are highly competitive in beat tracking, the
latter demonstrates more superiority in downbeat tracking.
Downbeat tracking is generally more difficult than beat
tracking because it is involved with deeper musical knowl-
edge, such as chord and bass progression, behind the ap-
parent spectrogram energy. In our model, the instrumental
attention captures the instrumental coordination as hints to
the harmonic cues that are orthogonal to the temporal axis,
and thus acquires better metrical modelling.
Comparing Ours w/o Aug.
to Ours, we observe a
consistent improvement across datasets brought by partial
demix augmentation, which indicates the general useful-
ness of this augmentation strategy to model training.
Compared to state-of-the-art models, our improvement
in downbeat accuracy is more significant than that in beat
accuracy. On the test-only GTZAN dataset, we obtain 4%
point gain in F-measure over Böck et al. [13] in down-
beat tracking.
Compared to Hung et al. [15], which is
also based on Transformer, our model can be more flexibly
trained (owing to the efficient DSA mechanism) on a 24GB
GPU in contrast to four 32GB GPUs reported in [15].
4.4 Attention Matrix Visualization
We visualize the attention matrix that our model learns by
interpreting it as a multi-step Markov transition matrix as
defined in Equation (8). Specifically, the L-step matrix is
the product of L one-step matrices through L layers. Here
we only consider TTLs with dilated self-attention, as ITLs
work on an orthogonal axis. Figure 5 shows the attention
matrix P (L) for L = 1, 3, 5, and 9 of the drum channel, in-
ferred from the piece hiphop.00090 chosen from GTZAN.
Figure 5a shows a one-step transition. Each position Qi
can only attend to its neighbours covered by the attention
window. Still, we observe that beat positions (denoted by
bk) are likely to get more attention. In Figure 5b where we
step to the beat scale, most attention spots are aligned with
beats. Moreover, we observe that the attention at bk is typi-
cally prolonged after Qi leaves bk, and is formed before Qi
reaches bk for every k. This means that our model learns
to transition its attention from the offbeat phase following
the last beat to the upbeat phase preceding the next beat.
Figure 5c further stretches the view to the downbeat scale,
and we can see similar patterns aligned with downbeat po-
sitions (denoted by dk). Finally, in Figure 5d, the attention
reaches further positions and displays a structural pattern.
The above visualization demonstrates the inner logic
that our model exploits for beat and downbeat tracking.
We see that our model gathers information from both local
and global scales with an organized hierarchy.
5. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we contribute a novel Transformer architec-
ture for audio beat and downbeat tracking. The main nov-
elty lies first in our design of dilated self-attention, which
brings down the computation complexity of Transformer
from quadratic to linear level. In addition, we successfully
enhance beat and downbeat tracking by utilizing off-the-
shelf progress in music demixing.
Our model not only
captures deeper harmonic cues for better metrical inference
but also discerns beat and downbeat in a visualizable hier-
archical manner. Our model is efficient, interpretable, and
potentially generalizable with highly competitive sequen-
tial modelling power. We hope our model encourages fu-
ture MIR research toward universal music understanding.
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

6.