We propose a system for rendering a symbolic piano per-
formance with flexible musical expression. It is necessary
to actively control musical expression for creating a new
music performance that conveys various emotions or nu-
ances. However, previous approaches were limited to fol-
lowing the composer’s guidelines of musical expression
or dealing with only a part of the musical attributes. We
aim to disentangle the entire musical expression and struc-
tural attribute of piano performance using a conditional
VAE framework. It stochastically generates expressive pa-
rameters from latent representations and given note struc-
tures. In addition, we employ self-supervised approaches
that force the latent variables to represent target attributes.
Finally, we leverage a two-step encoder and decoder that
learn hierarchical dependency to enhance the naturalness
of the output. Experimental results show that our system
can stably generate performance parameters relevant to the
given musical scores, learn disentangled representations,
and control musical attributes independently of each other.
1. INTRODUCTION
Computational modeling of expressive music performance
focuses on mimicking human behaviors that convey the
music [1, 2]. For piano performance, one common task
is to render an expressive performance from a quantized
musical score. It aims to reproduce the loudness and tim-
ing of musical notes that fits to the given score. Most of the
conventional studies have used musical scores of Western
piano music that includes sufficient amount of guidelines
for musical expressions [3±6]. Recent studies using deep
learning methods have successfully rendered plausible pi-
ano performances that are comparable to those of profes-
sional pianists from the given Classical scores [7±9].
More recently, it has increased attention to controlling
© S. Rhyu, S. Kim, and K. Lee. Licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Attribu-
tion: S. Rhyu, S. Kim, and K. Lee, ªSketching the Expression:
Flexible
Rendering of Expressive Piano Performance with Self-Supervised Learn-
ingº, in Proc. of the 23rd Int. Society for Music Information Retrieval
Conf., Bengaluru, India, 2022.
music performance by manipulating one or more disentan-
gled representations from a generative model. These rep-
resentations are sensitive to the variation of certain factors
while invariant to other factors [10]. Maezawa et al. aimed
to control a performer’s interpretation through a condi-
tional variational recurrent neural network (CVRNN) [11].
They intended to disentangle a time-variant representation
of the personal interpretation. In the acoustic domain, Tan
et al. proposed a generative model based on a Gaussian
mixture variational autoencoder (GM-VAE) that separately
controlled dynamics and articulations of the notes [12].
Their novelty lied in learning multiple representations of
high-level attributes from the low-level spectrogram.
However, these studies have constrained musical cre-
ativity. Maezawa et al. controlled musical expression only
through quantized features from the musical scores. Tan
et al. did not consider controlling tempo or timing with a
latent representation. These methods may have restricted
any potential for rendering piano performances with flex-
ible musical expression.
Musical creativity can be ex-
panded not only by composers but also by performers who
can elastically choose various strategies to highlight mul-
tiple nuances or emotions [13±15]. Moreover, the music
generation field can be also broadened if static music cre-
ated by automatic composition systems can be easily col-
ored with realistic and elastic expression [16].
Therefore, we attempt a new approach that renders pi-
ano performances with flexible musical expressions. We
disregard a typical assumption from previous studies that a
performer must follow a composer’s intent [4,17±19]. Ac-
cording to the literature, performers learn to identify or im-
itate "expressive models", or explicit planning, of existing
piano performances [20]. We focus on this attribute, defin-
ing it as a higher-level sketch of the expressive attributes
(i.e. dynamics, articulation, and tempo [21]) that the per-
former draws based on a personal interpretation of the mu-
sical piece [4, 11, 20]. We also assume that the remaining
attribute represents common performing strategies that are
connected to certain musical patterns, while these strate-
gies slightly differ across performers [22,23]. We call this
attribute as a structural attribute that belongs to given note
structures of a musical piece.
In this study, we propose a generative model that can

flexibly control the entire musical expression, or the ex-
plicit planning, of symbolic piano performance 1 .
Our
system is based on a conditional variational autoencoder
(CVAE) that is modified for sequential data [11, 24]. The
system generates multiple parameters of piano perfor-
mance from a note structure of a musical passage, using
disentangled representations for the explicit planning and
structural attribute.
We employ a self-supervised learning framework to
force the latent representations to learn our target attributes
[24±26]. In addition, we facilitate independent control of
the three expressive attributes±dynamics, articulation, and
tempo±by utilizing an existing method that aligns the la-
tent code with a target attribute [27,28]. Finally, we design
a novel mechanism that intuitively models a polyphonic
structure of piano performance. In particular, we insert
intermediate steps for chordwise encoding and decoding
of the piano performance to our encoder-decoder architec-
ture, where a chord denotes a group of simultaneous notes.
Our approach has several contributions as follows: 1)
Our system aims to control musical expression while main-
taining any characteristics induced by a given musical
structure; 2) We use self-supervised learning where new
supervisory signals are involved in regularizing the latent
representations effectively; 3) Our system aims to control
multiple expressive attributes independently of each other;
4) Lastly, we leverage an intermediate step that projects a
notewise representation into the chordwise in the middle
of our system to intuitively model the polyphonic structure
of piano performance.
2. PROPOSED METHODS
We aim to build a generative model that factorizes expres-
sive piano performance as the explicit planning and struc-
tural attribute. The model is based on a conditional vari-
ational autoencoder (CVAE) that reproduces performance
parameters based on a given musical structure.
2.1 Data Representation
We extract features that represent a human performance
and the corresponding musical score, following the con-
ventional studies [11,19,29].
Performance Features. We extract three features that
represent the expressive attributes of each performed note,
respectively: MIDIVelocity is a MIDI velocity value that
ranges from 24 to 104. IOIRatio represents an instan-
taneous variation in tempo. We compute an inter-onset-
interval (IOI) between the onset of a note and the mean
onset of the previous chord for both a performed note and
the corresponding score note. Then, a ratio of performed
IOI to score IOI is calculated, clipped between 0.125 and
8, and converted into a logarithmic scale [4]. Articula-
tion represents how much a note is shortened or length-
ened compared to the instantaneous tempo. It is a ratio of
a performed duration to an IOI value between the onset of
1 https://github.com/rsy1026/sketching_piano_
expression
a note and mean onset of the next chord [19]. It is clipped
between 0.25 and 4 and converted into a logarithmic scale.
Score Features. The features for a musical score repre-
sent eight categorical attributes for how the notes are com-
posed: Pitch is a MIDI index number that ranges from 21
to 108. RelDuration and RelIOI are 11-class attributes of
a quantized duration and IOI between a note onset and a
previous chord, respectively. They range from 1 to 11, and
each class represents a multiple of a 16th note’s length with
respect to a given tempo [30, 31]. IsTopVoice is a binary
attribute of whether the note is the uppermost voice. It is
heuristically computed regarding pitches and durations of
surrounding notes. PositionInChord and NumInChord
are 11-class attributes of a positional index of a note within
its chord and the total number of notes in that chord, re-
spectively, that range from 1 to 11. An index 1 for Posi-
tionInChord denotes the most bottom position. Staff is a
binary attribute of the staff of a note, either of the G clef or
F clef. IsDownbeat is a binary attribute of whether a note
is at a downbeat or not.
2.2 Modeling Musical Hierarchy
Inspired by previous studies [4, 8, 9, 32], we build a two-
step encoder and decoder: An encoder models both note-
wise and chordwise dependencies of the inputs, and a
decoder reconstructs the notewise dependency from the
chordwise representation and the notewise condition. We
denote a chord as a group of notes that are hit simultane-
ously, regardless of the staff, so that they sound together
at an instant time [33]. Thus, learning the chordwise de-
pendency is analogous to direct modeling of the temporal
progression of the piano performance. Let M ∈RC×N
be a matrix that aligns serialized notes to their polyphonic
structure, where C and N are the number of chords and
the number of notes, respectively. Within the encoder, the
notewise representation is sequentially average-pooled by
M with dynamic kernel sizes where each size represents
the number of notes in each chord. We denote this opera-
tion as N2C. In this way, we can directly model chord-level
dependency of the note-level expressive parameters [32].
In contrast, the decoder extends the chordwise representa-
tion from the encoder back to the notewise using the trans-
posed alignment matrix MT , of which process we denote
as C2N. Along this, the notewise embedding of the score
features replenishes the notewise information for the out-
put. Consequently, notes in the same chord share any in-
formation of their corresponding chord, while maintaining
their differences by the conditional score features:
N2C(e) =
M · e
PN
n=1 Mn,1:C
,
C2N(e) = MT · e
(1)
where e denotes a notewise or chordwise representation.
2.3 Overall Network Architecture
Our proposed network is generally based on the condi-
tional VAE framework [34, 35]. Concretely, we use the
sequential VAE that is modified for generation of sequen-
tial data [11,24,36]. Let x = {xn}N
n=1 be a sequence of the
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

Notewise
Encoder
N2C
ො𝑥
𝑥
𝑦
෠𝑘
𝐷(pln)
𝐷(str)
𝐿pln
𝐿reg
𝐿fac
At Training Only
Chordwise
Encoder
𝑧(str)
N2C
N2C
𝐿str
𝑧(pln)
𝑧(str)
Notewise
Encoder
Chordwise
Generator
C2N
RNN
BiRNN
𝑧(pln)
Notewise
Encoder
Figure 1: Overall architecture of the proposed system. The
orange box includes the auxiliary tasks only for training.
performance features, and y = {yn}N
n=1 be a sequence of
the conditional score features. Our network has two chord-
wise latent variables z(pln) = {z(pln)
c
}C
c=1 ∈RC×d(pln) and
z(str) = {z(str)
c
}C
c=1 ∈RC×d(str) that represent explicit plan-
ning and structural attribute, where d(pln) and d(str) are the
sizes of z(pln) and z(str), respectively. Our network gener-
ates notewise performance parameters x from these latent
variables and given score features y. The overall architec-
ture of our proposed system is illustrated in Figure 1.
Generation. A probabilistic generator parameterized
by θ produces the note-level performance parameters x
from the two latent variables z(pln) and z(str) with the given
condition y. We note that the latent variables are in chord-
level. This decreases a computational cost and also enables
intuitive modeling of polyphonic piano performance where
each time step represents a stack of notes and the simulta-
neous notes share common characteristics [8]:
pθ(x, y, z(pln), z(str)) =pθ(x|z(pln), z(str), y)
pθ(z(pln))
C
Y
c=1
pθ(z(str)
c
|z(str)
<c , y(chd)
≤c )
(2)
where y(chd) = N2C(ey) is the chordwise embedding, and
ey is the notewise embedding for y. We assume that the
prior of z(pln)
c
is a standard normal distribution. In contrast,
z(str)
c
is sampled from a sequential prior [24, 36, 37], con-
ditioned on both previous latent variables and chordwise
score features: z(str)
c
∼N(µ(prior), diag(σ(prior)2), where
[µ(prior), σ(prior)] = f (prior)(z(str)
<c , y(chd)
≤c ), and f (prior) is a
unidirectional recurrent neural network. The latent repre-
sentations and y(chd) pass through the decoder as shown in
Figure 1. During training, the model predicts the interme-
diate chordwise output that is computed as N2C(x). This
is to enhance reconstruction power of our system, propa-
gating accurate information of chord-level attributes to the
final decoder. The intermediate activation is then extended
to the notewise through the C2N operation. The note-level
parameters are generated autoregressively based on this ac-
tivation and the notewise score feature. We use teacher
forcing during training [38].
Inference. A probabilistic encoder parameterized by ϕ
approximates the posterior distibutions of the latent rep-
resentations z(pln) and z(str) from the performance input x
and conditional score input y:
qφ(z(pln), z(str)|x, y) =qφ(z(pln)|x(chd))
C
Y
c=1
qφ(z(str)
c
|x(chd)
≤c , y(chd)
≤c )
(3)
where x(chd) = N2C(ex) is the chordwise embedding,
and ex is the notewise embedding for x.
The pos-
terior distributions of z(pln)
c
and z(str)
c
are approximated
by distribution parameters encoded by f (pln)(x(chd)) and
f (str)(x(chd), y(chd)), where f (pln) and f (str) are bidirec-
tional and unidirectional recurrent neural networks, respec-
tively. We note that z(pln) is independent of the score fea-
tures y. This allows a flexible transfer of the explicit plan-
ning among other musical pieces. On the other hand, z(str)
is constrained by y since the structural attributes are de-
pendent on the note structure.
Training. We train the models pθ and qφ by approxi-
mating marginal distributions of the performance features
x conditioned on the score features y. This requires to
maximize negative evidence lower bound (ELBO) that
includes regularization force by Kullback±Leibler diver-
gence [34]:
LVAE = Eqφ(z(pln),z(str)|x,y)
h
log pθ(x|z(pln), z(str), y)
i
+ Eqφ(z(pln),z(str)|x,y)
h
log pθ(k|z(pln), z(str), y)
i
−KL(qφ(z(pln)|x)∥pθ(z(pln)))
−
C
X
c=1
KL(qφ(z(str)
c
|x(chd)
≤c , y(chd)
≤c )∥pθ(z(str)
c
|z(str)
<c , y(chd)
≤c ))
(4)
where k = N2C(x) is the chordwise performance features.
2.4 Regularizing the Latent Variables
We enhance disentanglement of the latent representations
z(pln) and z(str) using four regularization tasks [24].
Prediction Tasks. We extract new supervisory signals
for additional prediction tasks from the input data [24].
We define a signal of explicit planning I(pln) as a set of
smoothed contours of the expressive parameters. It is ex-
tracted as a polynomial function predicted from the chord-
wise performance parameters k. We also derive a signal
of structural attribute as I(str) = sign(k −I(pln)) which
represents normalized directions of the performance pa-
rameters. We train two discriminators D(pln) and D(str)
that directly receive z(pln) and z(str), respectively. D(pln)
is composed of A sub-discriminators where each discrim-
inator D(pln)
a
predicts a signal I(pln)
a
for each expressive
attribute a from z(pln)
a
∈RC×(d(pln)/A), where z(pln)
a
is
a constituent part of z(pln), and A is the number of ex-
pressive attributes.
This setting is for a clear disentan-
glement among the expressive attributes.
On the other
hand, D(str) predicts the signal I(str) at once for all ex-
pressive attributes that belong to the same musical struc-
ture. All discriminators are jointly trained with the gen-
erative model, and the costs Lpln and Lstr are minimized
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

as Lpln =
A
P
a MSE(D(pln)
a
(z(pln)
a
), I(pln)
a
) and Lstr =
MSE(D(str)(z(str)), I(str)), respectively.
Factorizing Latent Variables.
We further constrain
a generator to guarantee that z(pln) delivers correct in-
formation regardless of z(str) [39].
During training, we
sample a new output ˜x using z(pln) ∼qφ(z(pln)|x) and
˜z(str) ∼pθ(z(str)). Then, we re-infer ˜z(pln) ∼qφ(˜z(pln)|˜x)
to estimate the superversory signal I(pln). This prediction
loss is backpropagated only through the generator:
Lfac = 1
A
X
a
MSE(D(pln)
a
(˜z(pln)
a
), I(pln)
a
)
(5)
Aligning Latent Variables with Factors. Finally, we
enable the "sliding-fader" control of the expressive at-
tributes [28]. To this end, we employ the regularization
loss proposed by Pati et al. [27] that aligns specific dimen-
sions of z(pln) with the target expressive attributes. This
method assumes that a latent representation can be disen-
tangled through its monotonic relationship with a target at-
tribute. Let di and dj be a target dimension d of ith and
jth latent representations, respectively, where d ∈z(pln)
a
,
i, j ∈[1, M], and M is the size of a mini-batch. A dis-
tance matrix Dd is computed between di and dj within a
mini-batch, where Dd = di−dj. A similar distance matrix
Da is computed for the two target attribute values ai and
aj. We minimize a MSE between Dd and Da as follows:
Lreg = MSE(tanh(Dd), sign(Da))
(6)
2.5 Overall Objective
The overall objective of our proposed network aims to gen-
erate realistic performance features with properly disentan-
gled representations for the intended factors:
L = LVAE + λplnLpln + λstrLstr + λfacLfac + λregLreg (7)
where λpln, λstr, λfac, and λreg are hyperparameters for bal-
ancing the importance of the loss terms.
3. EXPERIMENTAL SETUPS
3.1 Dataset and Implementation
We use Yamaha e-Competition Dataset [8] and Vienna
4x22 Piano Corpus [40]. From these datasets, we collect
356 performances of 34 pieces by Frédéric Chopin, which
have been representative research subjects for analyzing
the Western musical expression [6, 22, 41, 42]. We use 30
pieces (108,738 batches) for training and the rest for test-
ing. To verify the generality of model performances, we
also collect the external dataset from ASAP dataset [43].
We use 116 performances for 23 pieces by 10 composers
who represent various eras of Western music. For subjec-
tive evaluation, we collect 42 songs of non-Classical songs
from online source 2 which are less constrained to written
expression than most Classical excerpts.
2 http://www.ambrosepianotabs.com/page/library
We basically follow Jeong et al. [8] to compute the input
features from the aligned pairs of performance and score
data. We set MIDI velocities and Beat Per Minute (BPM)
of all notes in the score data to be 64 and 120, respec-
tively. We also remove any grace notes for simplicity and
manually correct any errors. The performance features are
further normalized into a range from -1 to 1 for training.
We use an ADAM optimizer [44] with an initial learning
rate of 1e-5, which is reduced by 5% every epoch during
backpropagation. We empirically set λpln, λstr, λfac, and
λreg to be 1000, 100, 1, 10, respectively. We set a degree of
the polynomial function computing I(pln) as 4 through an
ablation study described in the supplementary material.
3.2 Comparative Methods
To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing method
that does not intentionally follow the written guidelines in
the musical score. Therefore, we use variants of our pro-
posed network as comparing methods that differ in model
architecture: Notewise denotes the proposed model with-
out the hierarchical learning. CVAE denotes a variant of
Notewise where z(pln) is substituted with the supervisory
signal I(pln). We also conduct an ablation study that inves-
tigates necessity of the four loss terms.
4. EVALUATION
We evaluate the proposed network in terms of both objec-
tive and subjective criteria.
4.1 Generation Quality
We compute Pearson’s correlation coefficients between the
reconstructed or generated samples and human piano per-
formances [6, 9, 11, 19]. We first measure the reconstruc-
tion quality of the test samples ("Rrecon"). Then, we eval-
uate the samples generated from ˜z(str) ∼pθ(z(str)) and ei-
ther of : 1) z(pln) ∼qφ(z(pln)|x) ("Rx|pln") and 2) z(pln)
∼
qφ(z(pln)
|x0) ("Rx|pln0"), where x0 is a zero matrix.
The results are shown in Table 1. Notewise shows the
best scores in both datasets, and our method outperforms
CVAE in Rrecon. It indicates that our proposed architecture
where a latent representation is used instead of a direct
condition is generally good at reconstructing the human
data. When using the randomly sampled ˜z(str), our method
and the model without Lreg show stable scores compared
to other baseline models.
The model without Lreg also
shows the highest scores in Rx|pln for both datasets. It indi-
cates that Lreg may contribute the least to generation power
among other loss terms. CVAE and the model only with
L(pln) also show high scores in Rx|pln0. This may be due
to the posterior collapse that makes the decoder depends
mostly on the score condition [45], which is demonstrated
in the supplementary material.
4.2 Disentangling Latent Representations
We verify whether the latent representations are well-
disentangled by appropriate information [24].
To this
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2: Qualitative samples for the proposed system. Light-blue, blue and gray lines denote the reconstructed results,
sampled results from the inferred z(pln), and their ground truths, respectively; black and orange lines denote the controlled
results that are generated from different random ˜z(str); and green lines denote the "sketch" values, or α, that are inserted to
z(pln). The samples demonstrate three excerpts that are: (a) Haydn’s Keyboard Sonata, Hob. XVI:39, 3rd movement, mm.
53-56; (b) Schubert’s Impromptu, Op. 90, No. 4, mm. 149-152; and (c) Balakirev’s Islamey, Op. 18, mm. 29-32.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: Qualitative results for estimating the explicit
planning from raw piano performances.
Pink and gray
lines denote the estimated contours and raw performance
parameters, respectively. The results in (a), (b), and (c) are
from the same excerpts for (a), (b), and (c) in Figure 2, re-
spectively.
Dataset
Internal
External
Metric
Rrecon
Rx|pln
Rx|pln0
Rrecon
Rx|pln
Rx|pln0
Notewise
CVAE
Lpln
Lpln + Lstr
w/o Lfac
w/o Lreg
Ours
Table 1: Evaluation results for the generation quality. The
higher score is the better.
end, each model infers the latent representations z(pln)
and z(str) from the test sets. Each model also randomly
samples ˜z(str) and infers z(pln)
∼
qφ(z(pln)|x0).
We
use z(pln)
to measure the structural attribute, since z(pln)
represents a flat expression where the structural attribute
can be solely exposed. Each model generates new out-
puts as x(pln) ∼pθ(x(pln)|z(pln), ˜z(str), y) and x(str) ∼
pθ(x(str)|z(pln)
, z(str), y). Then, we compute a new signal
˜I(pln) from x(pln) using the polynomial regression.
The
MSE values are calculated as MSEp = MSE(˜I(pln), I(pln))
and MSEs = MSE(x(str), k −I(pln)).
Dataset
Internal
External
Metric
MSEp
MSEs
MSEp
MSEs
Notewise
CVAE
Lpln
Lpln + Lstr
w/o Lfac
w/o Lreg
Ours
Table 2: Evaluation results for the disentanglement of the
latent representations.
Dataset
Internal
External
Metric
C
R
L
C
R
L
Notewise
CVAE
Lpln
Lpln + Lstr
w/o Lfac
w/o Lreg
Ours
Table 3: Evaluation results for the controllability of the
expressive attributes. C, R, and L denotes consistency, re-
strictiveness, and linearity, respectively. Each score is the
average score for the expressive attributes.
Table 2 shows that our method achieves the best scores
in all metrics for both datasets.
This confirms that our
proposed system can learn the latent representations that
reflect the intended attributes.
Notewise and the model
without Lreg also show the robust scores compared to other
baseline models. It indicates that using the notewise mod-
eling alone is still relevant for achieving appropriate repre-
sentations. It also implies that Lreg may not contribute to
the disentanglement as much as other loss terms.
4.3 Controllability of Expressive Attributes
We sample a new input ¯x where entries of each fea-
ture are constant across time.
Then, each model infers
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

Metric
Winning Rate (Human-likeness)
Group
T
UT
Overall
Notewise
CVAE
Ours
Table 4: Evaluation results for the winning rate in terms
of human-likeness. T, UT, and Overall denote musically
trained, untrained, and all groups, respectively.
¯z(pln) ∼qφ(¯z(pln)|¯x). We control each attribute by vary-
ing dimension values of ¯z(pln) following Tan et al. [28] and
examine the new samples generated from ¯z(pln). We lever-
age the existing metrics to measure the controllability of
each model [28]: Consistency ("C") measures consistency
across samples in terms of their controlled attributes; re-
strictiveness ("R") measures how much the uncontrolled
attributes maintain their flatness over time; and linearity
("L") measures how much the controlled attributes are cor-
related with the corresponding latent dimensions. We av-
erage over the three expressive attributes±dynamics, artic-
ulation, and tempo±into one score for each metric.
Table 3 demonstrates that our system shows the best
scores in consistency and linearity in both internal and ex-
ternal datasets. This indicates that our proposed method
can robustly control the latent representation z(pln) in in-
tended way.
The model without Lreg outperforms our
method in restrictiveness. It indicates that the uncontrolled
attributes by this model are the least interfered by the con-
trolled attribute. However, its scores on consistency and
linearity are lower than ours. It confirms that Lreg promotes
linear control of the target attributes.
4.4 Subjective Evaluation
We conduct a listening test to compare the proposed model
architecture to Notewise and CVAE. We qualitatively eval-
uate the base quality of the samples that have flat expres-
sions, so that quality judgments are independent of any
preference of arbitrary explicit planning. We generate each
sample using z(pln)
. A listening test is composed of 30 tri-
als where each participant chooses a more "human-like"
sample out of the generated sample and its plain MIDI [9].
Both samples have the same length which is a maximum of
15 seconds, rendered with TiMidity++ 3 without any pedal
effect. Human-likeness denotes how similar the sample is
to an actual piano performance that commonly appears in
popular music. A total of 28 participants are involved, and
6 participants are professionally trained in music.
The results are demonstrated in Table 4. We measure
a winning rate, a rate of winning over the plain MIDI,
and a top-ranking rate, a rate of being the highest rank
among the three models in terms of winning rate. These
metrics are further explained in the supplementary mate-
rial. The results show that musically trained ("T") and un-
trained ("UT") groups show the different tendency of each
other: in the trained group, CVAE shows the best winning
rate, and our method gets the best top-ranking rate; in the
3 https://sourceforge.net/projects/timidity/
Figure 4: Evaluation results for the top-ranking rate. T,
UT, and Overall denote musically trained, untrained, and
all groups, respectively.
untrained group, our method shows the highest winning
rate, whereas Notewise is top-ranked most frequently. We
note that our system reveals smaller variances than those
of CVAE and Notewise of the musically trained and un-
trained groups in the winning rate, respectively. Moreover,
our system receives the highest overall scores for both met-
rics. It indicates that our system can be stably perceived
more human-like than the plain MIDI compared to other
baseline models.
4.5 Qualitative Examples
Our system can render new piano performances from the
scratch given a musical score. It can directly generate ex-
pressive parameters from the randomly sampled ˜z(pln) ∼
pθ(z(pln)) and ˜z(str) ∼pθ(z(str)). We note that ˜z(pln) does
not have temporal dependency: each ˜z(pln)
c
is sampled in-
dependently of ˜z(pln)
c−1 . Hence, we need to insert specific
values {α(c)}C
c=1, which we call as "smooth sketches",
into the target dimensions of z(pln) if any temporal depen-
dency of explicit planning is necessary. Figure 2 shows
that the controlled parameters are greatly correlated with
α, while their local characteristics follow those of the
ground truth. In addition, the black and orange lines to-
gether demonstrate granular variety in the parameters in-
duced by different ˜z(str) for the same musical structure.
Moreover, Figure 3 shows that our system can estimate ex-
plicit planning from arbitrary human performances, indi-
cating that our system can derive relevant information on
explicit planning from the unseen data.
5. CONCLUSION
We propose a system that can render expressive piano per-
formance with flexible control of musical expression. We
attempt to achieve representations for the explicit planning
and structural attribute through self-supervised learning
objectives. We also leverage the two-step modeling of two
hierarchical units for an intuitive generation. Experimen-
tal results confirm that our system shows stable generation
quality, disentangles the target representations, and con-
trols all expressive attributes independently of each other.
Future work can be improving our system using a larger
dataset for various genres and composers. We can also
further compare our system with recent piano-rendering
models [8] to investigate any connections between a per-
former’s explicit planning and a composer’s intent.
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We deeply appreciate Dasaem Jeong, Taegyun Kwon, and
Juhan Nam for giving technical support to initiate this re-
search. We also especially appreciate Hyeong-Seok Choi
for providing critical feedback on the model architecture
and evaluation. We greatly appreciate You Jin Choi and all
of my colleagues who gave great help with respect to the
listening test.
7.