In this work, we provide a broad comparative analysis of
strategies for pre-training audio understanding models for
several tasks in the music domain, including labelling of
genre, era, origin, mood, instrumentation, key, pitch, vo-
cal characteristics, tempo and sonority. Specifically, we
explore how the domain of pre-training datasets (music or
generic audio) and the pre-training methodology (super-
vised or unsupervised) affects the adequacy of the resulting
audio embeddings for downstream tasks.
We show that models trained via supervised learning on
large-scale expert-annotated music datasets achieve state-
of-the-art performance in a wide range of music labelling
tasks, each with novel content and vocabularies. This can
be done in an efficient manner with models containing less
than 100 million parameters that require no fine-tuning or
reparameterization for downstream tasks, making this ap-
proach practical for industry-scale audio catalogs.
Within the class of unsupervised learning strategies,
we show that the domain of the training dataset can
significantly impact the performance of representations
learned by the model.
We find that restricting the do-
main of the pre-training dataset to music allows for training
with smaller batch sizes while achieving state-of-the-art
in unsupervised learningÐand in some cases, supervised
learningÐfor music understanding.
We also corroborate that, while achieving state-of-the-
art performance on many tasks, supervised learning can
cause models to specialize to the supervised information
provided, somewhat compromising a model’s generality.
1. INTRODUCTION
In this work, we consider a broad array of classification and
labelling tasks under the umbrella of music understanding.
Such tasks include the labelling of genre, origin, mood,
musical key, instruments, era, emotion and pitch present
in music. These tasks have many applications in industry,
© Matthew C. McCallum, Filip Korzeniowski, Sergio Ora-
mas, Fabien Gouyon, Andreas F. Ehmann. Licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Attribu-
tion:
Matthew C. McCallum, Filip Korzeniowski, Sergio Oramas, Fa-
bien Gouyon, Andreas F. Ehmann, ªSupervised and Unsupervised Learn-
ing of Audio Representations for Music Understandingº, in Proc. of the
23rd Int. Society for Music Information Retrieval Conf., Bengaluru, India,
particularly in music streaming and recommendation ser-
vices where automated understanding of audio can assist
in a range of tasks such as organizing, filtering and person-
alizing content to a listener’s taste and context.
Recent research in automated audio understanding has
focused on training convolutional [1±12] and / or atten-
tion based [13±21] networks on moderately large collec-
tions of frequency-domain audio [2,5±8,12±14,18,20,21],
time-domain audio [3, 10, 11, 19] or multi-format / multi-
modal [4,9,21,22] data. Such models are often trained on
tags encompassing some of the musical labels listed above,
achieving promising results [1,3,6,11,13±15,22]. More re-
cent works propose unsupervised strategies for music un-
derstanding such as contrastive learning [2, 4, 5, 8±10, 21]
or predictive / generative approaches [7,20,21,23]. Unsu-
pervised strategies are appealing because they require no
annotated data and generalize well to new tasks [2, 21],
but lag the performance of supervised learning at a simi-
lar scale [2,10]. Generative learning strategies [7,23] have
been shown to achieve competitive, and sometimes state-
of-the-art (SOTA), performance in several music under-
standing tasks [24], although, currently there is no evalua-
tion demonstrating the effectiveness of this approach to any
of the aforementioned approaches, at comparable scale.
Modern music streaming services have very large mu-
sic catalogs that amount to many petabytes of audio data
if uncompressed. Due to the scale of this data it is de-
sirable to build models that are efficiently scalable, and
understand audio in a general enough way that, as needs
or requirements change, they may be used to solve novel
problems without reprocessing such data. Models in the
order of 10M or 100M parameters are currently relatively
cost-effective to both train and apply inference to industry-
scale catalogs, whilst models consisting of billions of pa-
rameters, e.g. that evaluated in [24], are typically imprac-
tical, or very expensive, for both training and inference.
More recently, research has adopted approaches pro-
ducing generalized audio embeddings [2, 4±10, 12, 18, 19,
25] in a supervised or unsupervised way, by training mod-
els on large amounts of labelled or unlabelled audio. When
such models are applied to novel audio, the internal state of
the models has been found to contain much of the informa-
tion necessary for previously unseen tasks. This is demon-
strated by training shallow classifiers (probes) on embed-
dings consisting of the activations of a given model layer,
that map these values to a downstream task. Such an ap-
proach achieves competitive results using either unsuper-

vised [25] or supervised [6] learning. Most importantly,
the embeddings on which the probes are trained are many
orders of magnitude smaller than the audio itself and only
need to be computed once per audio file. Such embeddings
can be stored efficiently, and downstream classifiers can be
trained with significantly less resources. The excellent per-
formance, generality, and scalability of this approach are
crucial factors for its utility in industry.
This approach to audio understanding has been high-
lighted in recent benchmarks such as HARES [2] and
HEAR [26], where embeddings are evaluated across a
number of audio understanding tasks pertaining to a range
of content types.
Any score aggregation across these
benchmarks to determine a "best" embedding is difficult
due to the disparate range of metrics employed and further-
more, may obfuscate the strengths and weakness of any
given approach. However, evaluating across a common
range of tasks can be useful in comparing such strengths
and weaknesses. We find that the current tasks evaluated in
the HEAR and HARES benchmarks are lacking in evalua-
tion on music content. Wrt. polyphonic music, the HARES
benchmark includes only the Magnatagatune dataset, and
the HEAR benchmark includes only GTZAN genre and
music / speech datasets. While other public music datasets
exist, such benchmarks are somewhat limited by the re-
quirement to provide access to the audio of all datasets.
Here, we do not intend to establish a new open bench-
mark, but investigate the effectiveness of supervised and
unsupervised learning for audio embeddings employed
specifically for music understanding, across as broad an
array of tasks as is available within time and resource
constraints. For supervised learning we train models on
large scale datasets of annotated magnitude log-mel spec-
trograms both in the music domain and in the general au-
dio domain. For unsupervised learning we train contrastive
models using SimCLR loss [27, 28] on the same sets of
magnitude log-mel spectrograms, excluding annotations.
The contributions of this work are as follows:
we
provide a broad analysis of supervised and unsupervised
learning strategies for pre-training audio models for mu-
sic understanding; we show that for multilabel / multiclass
classification of music, large-scale supervised learning on
music data achieves SOTA performance, in many cases
outperforming both prior SOTA and unsupervised learn-
ing by significant margins; we show that supervised learn-
ing on labelled music data does not generalize as well as
unsupervised learning to novel tasks not covered in those
labels; finally, we show that the domain of pre-training au-
dio datasets has a significant impact on the performance of
embeddings, particularly for unsupervised learning.
2. PRE-TRAINING METHODOLOGY
To achieve the objectives outlined in Section 1, we fol-
low a familiar transfer learning paradigm (Figure 1) where
models are pre-trained using supervised or unsupervised
learning. Thereafter, the frozen activations from a layer of
that model, forming embeddings, z, are mapped to a down-
stream task using a simple network p(z).
CNN
CNN
PROJECT
PROJECT
PROBE
SUPERVISED
PRETRAINING
UNSUPERVISED
PRETRAINING
EVALUATION
FEATURE 
SAMPLING
Figure 1. System diagram of both pre-training approaches
employed in this paper, and evaluation.
2.1 Supervised and Unsupervised Training
In the supervised setting we learn a function f(X) ⇒ˆy
mapping features X (log-mel spectrograms) to binary la-
bels, y, by applying Adam optimization [29] to the binary
cross-entropy loss function,
Ls(y, ˆy) = −1
NK
N−1
X
i=0
yi log(ˆyi) + (1 −yi) log(1 −ˆyi),
where batch size N = 512, and K is the number of labels.
In the unsupervised setting, we employ the SimCLR ob-
jective [27,28], which has been shown to provide promis-
ing results for both music and audio understanding [2,10].
The SimCLR objective employs correlated (positive) pairs
of samples by mapping each feature to an embedding
space, f(X) ⇒z ∈Rm, with embedding dimensional-
ity m = 1728. A projector, then maps the embedding
space to a loss space h(z) ⇒v ∈Rn, with dimen-
sionality n = 1024.
Here, each element is then com-
pared to all other elements in a batch via distance function,
d(vi, vj) = vi · vj/∥vi∥∥vj∥. The loss is then computed
as the normalized temperature-scaled cross entropy,
Lu(vi, vj) = −log
exp (d(vi, vj)/τ)
P2N−1
k=0
1[k̸=i] exp (d(vi, vk)/τ)
,
which is summed across 2N examples in N = 1920 posi-
tive pairs, where i = j, for all values of both i ∈[0, N −1]
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

and j ∈[0, N −1]. Here, 1[k̸=i] is an indicator func-
tion evaluating to 1 for k = i, otherwise evaluating to 0.
τ = 0.1 denotes a temperature hyper-parameter.
SimCLR loss can be interpreted as a one hot classifi-
cation problemÐfor each example, identifying its positive
pair amongst all other (negative) examples in the batch.
Because the batch-size determines the number of negative
examples in the batch, and hence, the likelihood of non-
trivial negatives, a large batch size of N pairs is crucial
to this learning strategy, with larger batch sizes resulting
in notable performance improvements [9]. However, batch
sizes are limited to the memory of the available compute
resources (e.g., of GPUs / TPUs). Hence, when consider-
ing compute costs, it is desirable to reduce batch size.
The primary objective of this work is to provide a com-
parative analysis of the utility of supervised and unsuper-
vised learning strategies for a range of music understand-
ing tasks under different data sources.
As such we do
not propose to investigate or innovate on the model ar-
chitecture defining f(X) itself, and employ the Short-Fast
Normalizer-Free Net F0 (SF-NFNet-F0) of [2]. This archi-
tecture was chosen due to its demonstrated excellent per-
formance in audio understanding, its design intent specif-
ically for audio, and its use of efficient operations such as
grouped convolutions. Furthermore, this architecture does
not employ batch-normalization, improving training time
and resource requirements, particularly when using Sim-
CLR loss, by removing the need to globally synchronize
data between GPU devices at each batch-normalization
layer. Our intent was to reproduce this model as accu-
rately as possible. However, due to the information avail-
able to us at the time of publication, there may be some
discrepancies between our implementation and that in [2].
To ensure reproducibility, we release a Tensorflow imple-
mentation of the model used in this paper with SCOOCH
configurations 1 for each of the models trained 2 . Our SF-
NFNet-F0 implementation contains 62.4M parameters.
In both supervised and unsupervised settings we em-
ploy mixup [30] directly on the sampled log-mel spectro-
grams in real-time during training for data augmentation.
We acknowledge that additively combined audio sources
do not result in additively combined magnitude spectro-
grams due to both constructive and destructive interfer-
ence. However, such an augmentation is an efficient oper-
ation to perform in real-time data sampling pipelines, mit-
igating data bandwidth bottlenecks that may be caused by
more complex operations. We employ mixup by shuffling
features within each batch and additively combining the
shuffled features (and labels for supervised learning) to the
original batch. Mixup gains are sampled from a beta dis-
tribution with parameters α = 5.0 and β = 2.0, for each
feature in a batch.
In all pre-training contexts, we use an Adam optimizer
with a learning rate following a warm-up cosine decay
schedule, first increasing to 0.0002 over 5k steps, then
decreasing to 0.0 over 195k steps. While dense projec-
1 https://github.com/PandoraMedia/scooch
2 https://github.com/PandoraMedia/music-audio-representations
tors, h(z) are an inherent part of the unsupervised SimCLR
learning approach, we find projectors to also be useful in
the supervised setting, adding a non-linear transformation
between the learned embeddings, z, and the supervised la-
bels, ˆy = h(f(X)). We notice such an approach has also
been useful in computer vision [31]. Hence, in all contexts
we employ a projector consisting of 3 × 4096 node hid-
den layers with ReLU activation. Supervised models were
trained on 8 v100 GPUs taking approximately 30 hours,
while unsupervised models were trained on 16 A100 GPUs
taking approximately 80 hours.
2.2 Datasets
Pre-training datasets can have a significant impact on su-
pervised and unsupervised model performance. In the su-
pervised context, there has been evidence that models are
less generalizable to unseen tasks [2], perhaps due to the
information present in the supervised labels. In the un-
supervised context, less investigation has been conducted
into the effect of the content of pre-training datasets. In this
context, the problem of sampling positive and non-trivial
negative examples within a dataset is closely tied to the di-
versity of content in that dataset. Furthermore, when em-
ploying mixup as a data augmentation strategy, the content
of the pre-training dataset also defines the additive noise
that is applied to features during training.
We compare pre-training on two large datasets, namely
Musicset and a version of Audioset [32]. The Audioset
training set contains ≈1.7M distinct labelled content
pieces, and Musicset ≈1.8M. Audioset consists of 10 sec-
ond snippets of various audio sources: music, speech and
environmental audio (4,791 hours, ≈602 GB of audio fea-
ture data). Musicset, in contrast, focuses solely on music;
it consists only of labelled complete songs, each up to sev-
eral minutes in length (117,497 hours, ≈14.7 TB of audio
feature data). Musicset is, to our knowledge, the largest
dataset of expert-annotated audio ever trained on. While
it is not publicly available, we believe it valuable to report
the results of models trained on this dataset to communi-
cate the effectiveness of supervised learning at this scale.
For supervised learning, in addition to the features
themselves, the labels differ. Each dataset’s vocabulary
is distinct but similar in size (527 labels for Audioset and
500 labels for Musicset), however, Figure 2 shows the label
density and distribution of both datasets differs.
2.3 Feature Sampling
The features, X, are log-magnitude log-mel spectrograms
produced from waveforms sampled at 16 kHz. We use 96
HTK-log-mel spaced, power normalized, frequency bins
with center frequences from 0 Hz to 8 kHz, analyzed with
a window size of 25 ms, a Fourier transform size of 2048
bins and a hop size of 10 ms. We sample 3 s snippets of
each content piece in real-time (during training) across the
pre-training dataset, forming features, X ∈R96×300. Sam-
pling features in real-time from full-length tracks has the
benefit of a high ratio of distinct features per static dataset
size by reducing redundant (overlapping) data storage. For
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

Figure 2. Label density distributions for Musicset and Au-
dioset. (a), (b) plots the sorted Musicset label counts on a
linear (in millions) and logarithmic scale, respectively. (c),
(d) plots the same data for Audioset, respectively.
example, a 183 second song (6.8MB) results in 18k distinct
features (each 112kB) with the above parameters.
To build a batch from a dataset, we first select a uniform
random sample of tracks (with replacement); then, from
each selected track, we choose a random 3-second spectro-
gram snippet, without padding. In the unsupervised con-
text, we need to select positive and negative pairs for each
selected snippet. Positive pairs are sampled from the same
10 second "track" for Audioset; for Musicset, positive ex-
amples are also sampled from the same track, although we
require positive pairs to be centered on frames less than
5 seconds apart in the track’s timeline. As negative exam-
ples, the SimCLR objective implicitly uses all other sam-
ples in a batch. We also tried forcing examples from the
same track, but further away from the anchor than the pos-
itive, into every batch as hard negatives. Such an approach
has shown promising results in music segmentation [33],
however, we found that for music labelling at the averaged
track-level this did not change our results significantly. As
such, we omit this approach from our evaluation.
3. EVALUATION
To evaluate embedding performance, we take the global
average pooled activations of the final convolutional layer
in the SF-NFNet-F0 architecture for 3 second feature snip-
pets sampled along the length of each audio timeline at a
frequency of 0.5 Hz, then average these sampled embed-
dings along the length of the timeline (with the exception
of NSynth datasets as described later in this section). We
found similar results training probes on both the timeline-
averaged embeddings, and individual embeddings sampled
directly from track timelines, with slight improvements
when using timeline-averaged embeddings in some cases.
Each of the embeddings derived from pre-trained mod-
els have different levels of predictive power and will under-
fit / overfit with different parameters for each downstream-
dataset / pre-trained model combination. To demonstrate
the potential of embeddings, and to investigate whether
a given embedding can achieve SOTA performance on a
given dataset, it is important to optimize the probe param-
eters for each dataset. However, in cases where such a
transfer learning methodology is SOTA, it is important to
constrain the probe to the limitations imposed in previous
works so that it is the quality of embeddings that are evalu-
ated, and not that of the probes. With these considerations,
we adopt a hybrid strategy based on the prior SOTA for
each dataset. We optimize the parameters of probes in all
cases except where the prior SOTA adopts a similar trans-
fer learning methodology, in which case, we constrain the
probes to the parameter ranges investigated in those prior
works. Regardless of prior works, we restrict all probes
to simple multi-layer perceptron (MLP) classifiers which
can be trained on a single 32 core CPU in less than 1 hour
to maintain the aforementioned benefits of efficiency and
scalability that such a transfer learning approach provides.
In all cases, we train probes using Adam optimization
with a cosine learning rate schedule with 1,000 steps of
warmup followed by a decay to zero over the remainder of
the steps. We optimize the learning rate, number of train-
ing steps, and l2-regularization of each probe to achieve
best performance / prevent overfitting.
In total we evaluate the performance over annotations
of 7 distinct collections of audio, comprising 15 distinct
datasets in total. An overview of datasets is shown in Ta-
ble 1, and probe configurations in Table 2. We also publish
more detailed SCOOCH configurations for probes, tag-
level results, and model weights for the Musicset-ULarge
model as a baseline for future research. 3 The remainder
of this section covers specific notes on each dataset.
Dataset
Task
#Items
#Labels
Avg. secs
Hours
MSDS
tagging
MSD50
tagging
tagging
tagging
AMM
mood
MuMu
genre
MTT
tagging
NSynthP
pitch
NSynthI
instrument
GTZAN
genre
Emo
emotion
N/A
GSKey
key
Jam-50
tagging
Jam-All
tagging
Jam-MT
mood/theme
Table 1. Overview of evaluation datasets. The sizes for
MSD50 and MSD500 disagree with [22]. The published
MSD50 splits include 35,745 IDs, and we exclude any
tracks in MSD500 without any tags in the vocabulary.
Magnatagatune: Magnatagatune (MTT) [34] annota-
tions include genre, instrumentation / vocal, mood, per-
ceptual tempo, origin and sonority features. We adopt the
common approach using the published splits and top 50
tags 4 . Some research removes tracks without tags in the
most common 50 tags. To make results comparable to the
3 https://github.com/PandoraMedia/music-audio-representations
4 https://github.com/jongpillee/music_dataset_split
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

Dataset
Layers
Dropout
Batch (N)
Constraint
MSDS
None
MSD50
None
None
None
AMM
None
MuMu
linear
None
MTT
NSynthP
linear
[2]
NSynthI
linear
[2]
GTZAN
linear
None
Emo
None
GSKey
None
Jam-50
None
Jam-All
None
Jam-MT
None
Table 2. Probe parameters
most recent SOTA on this dataset [24], we keep items with-
out tags in both training and evalution sets.
GTZAN: This dataset addresses the problem of genre
classification in a single-label context [35]. We employ the
fault-filtered version of this dataset 4 .
NSynth:
Here we evaluate detecting the pitch
(NSynthP) and instrument (NSynthI) of individual musi-
cal notes. Following [2], in the case of NSynthP we ana-
lyze the average of embeddings from four non-overlapping
consecutive snippets of 1 second feature windows, and for
NSynthI we analyze a single embedding for each note pro-
duced using a 4 second feature window.
Million Song Dataset:
The Million Song Dataset
(MSD) contains labels pertaining to era, instrumentation,
sonority, genre, mood, origin and activity.
Because of
the size of this dataset and variation in label quality
throughout we adopt several different splits and vocabu-
laries for the dataset. For comparability with the previ-
ous SOTA, we adopt the vocabulary of the 50 most com-
mon labels, and the splits employed in [15] 4 , namely
MSDS. We also take advantage of the several cleaned and
artist-separated datasets available for this collection [22]Ð
MSD50, MSD100 and MSD500, for which the splits and
vocabularies are available publicly 5 .
All Music Moods:
The All Music Moods dataset
(AMM) [36], focuses on mood prediction for the MSD au-
dio data. Because the mood labels are heavily correlated
with the artists in the dataset, we find it important to adopt
the artist-seperated split 6 . With no previously published
result on this split, we additionally provide results for em-
beddings produced by the MusiCNN model [37].
Jamendo: This dataset contains genre, instrument and
mood / theme tags for audio from Jamendo [38]. We eval-
uate on all tags (Jam-All) and the 50 most common (Jam-
50). Because very few of the mood / theme tags are in
Jam-50, we also evaluate the mood / theme category (Jam-
MT). We use the official splits 7 and full-length audio.
GiantSteps Key: This dataset (GSKey) concerns ma-
jor/minor key classification in electronic musicÐa 24-way
classification problem. It combines two datasets: the first,
5 https://github.com/minzwon/tag-based-music-retrieval
6 https://github.com/fdlm/listening-moods
7 https://github.com/MTG/mtg-jamendo-dataset
604 2-minute samples of electronic music tracks collected
from beatport.com [39]; the second 8 , consists of 1486
tracks from the same source.
Consistent with previous
work [23, 40], we use the former 604 samples for test-
ing, and the latter for training / validation, selecting high-
confidence annotations partitioned into train and valida-
tion sets according to [23]. For evaluation we compute a
weighted accuracy score common in key classification 9 .
EmoMusic:
This dataset (Emo) concerns emotion
recognition [41], and provides continuous annotations for
valence and arousal. Following [23], we consider the static
version of this dataset, where target values are averaged for
each clip, and use the artist-based train / test partitioning
provided in their work. This poses a regression problemÐ
we use the coefficient of determination as the evaluation
metric for both valence (EmoV) and arousal (EmoA).
MuMu: The Multimodal Music dataset (MuMu) [42],
focuses on multilabel genre predictions for the MSD au-
dio data, with genre annotations from the Amazon Reviews
dataset. We evaluate using the official splits 10 .
4. RESULTS
In order to derive conclusions on the potential performance
of supervised models trained using binary labels on music
data, we train a supervised model on the complete Music-
set dataset, namely Musicset-Sup. To compare these re-
sults to supervised learning on a large-scale public dataset
covering music, environmental, and speech audio, we pro-
vide results for a model trained on ≈1.7M items from Au-
dioset, namely Audioset-Sup. To compare supervised and
unsupervised learning at a similar scale, we provide results
for a model trained using the unsupervised methodology
discussed in Section 2 on the same Musicset dataset audio
data and the Audioset audio data, namely Musicset-ULarge
and Audioset-ULarge using a batch size of 1920 pairs.
In addition, we train two further unsupervised mod-
els using a batch-size of 256. One trained on Audioset
(Audioset-USmall), and one on ≈1.8M randomly sampled
10 second snippets from Musicset, one per content piece
(Musicset-USmall). The reasoning for this is two-foldÐ
firstly by sampling short snippets from Musicset we mit-
igate the confounding variable of dataset size when com-
paring the two, secondly this allows us to investigate the
effect of batch size in the unsupervised learning paradigm.
For convenience, we also include results for the recent
evaluations in [2, 24], and those for any other previous
SOTA, excluding these two evaluations. The results for
each of these models is shown in Table 3 for all datasets ex-
cluding annotations of MSD, which are shown in Table 4.
There, we note that for all multilabel music tagging tasks,
the Musicset-Sup model achieves SOTA performance by
significant margins. This is encouraging given that the Mu-
sicset training dataset was created naively, and the super-
vised information therein opens the door to improvements
such as label-balanced sampling which has been shown to
8 https://github.com/GiantSteps/giantsteps-mtg-key-dataset
9 https://www.music-ir.org/mirex/wiki/2021:Audio_Key_Detection
10 https://zenodo.org/record/1236906#.YoPIAhNBx0s
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

Model
MTT
GTZAN
NSynthP
NSnythI
EmoV
EmoA
GSKey
Jam-50
Jam-All
mAP
ROC
Acc
Acc
Acc
r2
r2
W. Acc
mAP
ROC
mAP
ROC
Musicset-Sup
Audioset-Sup
Musicset-ULarge
Audioset-ULarge
Musicset-USmall
Audioset-USmall
Jukebox [23]
-
-
-
-
-
-
Prev. SF-NFNet-F0 [2]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
SOTA Excl. [2,23]
-
-
-
-
-
-
Table 3. Results for models on all datasets, excluding MSD annotations and Jam-MT. Models within 0.01 of SOTA are
bold. *The SOTA for GSKey has no publicly available implementation details and is specialized for this dataset, e.g., [48].
Model
MSDS
MSD50
MuMu
AMM
Jam-MT
mAP
ROC
mAP
ROC
mAP
ROC
mAP
ROC
mAP
ROC
mAP
ROC
mAP
ROC
Musicset-Sup
Audioset-Sup
Musicset-ULarge
Audioset-ULarge
Musicset-USmall
Audioset-USmall
SOTA
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Table 4. Results for all models on MSD annotations and Jam-MTT. Models within 0.01 of SOTA are bold. *The previ-
ous SOTA for MuMu evaluated artist-level predictions rather than track-level. †The SOTA for Jam-MT is trained on an
expanded within-taxonomy set (≈16k tracks), here we restrict probe training to Jamendo tracks (≈10k).
realize further performance gains [6]. We leave this inves-
tigation for future work.
It is also encouraging to see that unsupervised learning
on music audio (Musicset-ULarge) achieves SOTA perfor-
mance compared to previous unsupervised models, in ad-
dition to some supervised models (specifically, for models
trained on Jam-50 and all MSD datasets).
Comparing to recent transfer learning approaches [2,
24], we see that in all cases either Musicset-Sup or
Musicset-ULarge outperform or are on par with these, with
the exception of NSynthI. This is a promising result es-
pousing the value of music only audio datasets consider-
ing that previously reported results for unsupervised learn-
ing on Audioset [2] used more than double the batch size
of those in this paper. Wrt. the Jukebox model, models
trained for this paper use approximately 1% of the param-
eters and take less than 1% of the GPU flop hours to train.
We see that the supervised models evaluated demon-
strate shortcomings in performance on pitch (NSynthP) and
key (GSKey) tasks. This corroborates the findings in [24]
that models trained on tags do not perform well in this task,
and the findings in [2] that supervised pre-trained models
do not generalize as well to novel tasks. We note that there
are no pitch or key labels in the Musicset dataset, and in
fact, many of the labels employed (e.g., genre, mood, etc.)
require the model to be somewhat agnostic to such infor-
mation. It is yet to be seen whether including such infor-
mation in the labels of a pre-training dataset would im-
prove the generalizability of such models, though this is
outside of the scope of the current work. Interestingly, we
see that unsupervised models trained specifically on music
data show significant improvements in key estimation.
When comparing the domain of the pre-training dataset
features in the models of Musicset-USmall and Audioset-
USmall we see that in all cases, in-domain data (music)
results in a better performing model. We conjecture that
this may be due to (a) increasing the chances of non-trivial
negative examples within each batch relative to each pos-
itive pair, due to the homogeneity of the dataset, and (b)
music is more spectrally dense and correlated than other
common noise sources employed in mixup augmentation,
such as speech or various environmental noises.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this work we investigated both unsupervised and super-
vised learning strategies, to produce compact audio rep-
resentations that may be deployed across industry-scale
audio catalogs for a range of downstream use cases. We
observed that supervised training on large scale expert-
annotated music data achieves SOTA results in music tag-
ging. We see that unsupervised learning on datasets of the
same scale also achieves excellent performance, across a
wider range of tasks than supervised learning, particularly
on those that involve information not represented in the
supervised dataset. Finally, we see that for unsupervised
learning, restricting the domain of the pre-training dataset
to music results in improvements in model performance.
Proceedings of the 23rd ISMIR Conference, Bengaluru, India, December 4-8, 2022

6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Pandora music ana-
lyst team for their years of dedicated and careful work that
enables us to investigate supervised machine learning sys-
tems at modern levels of quality and scale.
7.