MONO-TO-STEREO THROUGH PARAMETRIC STEREO GENERATION
Joan Serrà
Davide Scaini
Santiago Pascual
Daniel Arteaga
Jordi Pons
Jeroen Breebaart
Giulio Cengarle
Dolby Laboratories
firstname.lastname@dolby.com
ABSTRACT
Generating a stereophonic presentation from a mono-
phonic audio signal is a challenging open task, especially
if the goal is to obtain a realistic spatial imaging with
a speciﬁc panning of sound elements. In this work, we
propose to convert mono to stereo by means of predict-
ing parametric stereo (PS) parameters using both nearest
neighbor and deep network approaches. In combination
with PS, we also propose to model the task with generative
approaches, allowing to synthesize multiple and equally-
plausible stereo renditions from the same mono signal. To
achieve this, we consider both autoregressive and masked
token modelling approaches. We provide evidence that the
proposed PS-based models outperform a competitive clas-
sical decorrelation baseline and that, within a PS prediction
framework, modern generative models outshine equivalent
non-generative counterparts. Overall, our work positions
both PS and generative modelling as strong and appealing
methodologies for mono-to-stereo upmixing. A discussion
of the limitations of these approaches is also provided.
1. INTRODUCTION
Single-channel monophonic (mono) signals are found in
multiple situations, such as historical recordings or current
ones made with a single microphone (e.g., ﬁeld recordings,
amateur band rehearsals, etc.). Even recordings made with
two or more microphones that are not spaced enough or
that do not have enough directivity may be better treated
by downmixing to mono (e.g., mobile phone recordings).
Furthermore, many processing algorithms, including mod-
ern deep neural network algorithms, cannot yet or are sim-
ply not designed to handle more than one channel. Unlike
these scenarios, the most common listening experiences,
either though loudspeakers or headphones, involve two-
channel stereophonic (stereo) signals. Hence the useful-
ness of mono to stereo upmixing.
Classical approaches to produce a pseudo-stereo ef-
fect from a mono signal are based on decorrelation. Ini-
© J. Serrà, D. Scaini, S. Pascual, D. Arteaga, J. Pons,
J. Breebaart, and G. Cengarle. Licensed under a Creative Commons At-
tribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Attribution: J. Serrà,
D. Scaini, S. Pascual, D. Arteaga, J. Pons, J. Breebaart, and G. Cengarle,
“Mono-to-stereo through parametric stereo generation”, in Proc. of the
24th Int. Society for Music Information Retrieval Conf., Milan, Italy,
2023.
tial approaches used time delays and complementary ﬁl-
ters [1], although all-pass ﬁlters [2] are commonly used
nowadays, together with multi-band processing to improve
the effect [3–5]. Instead of multi-band, estimation of fore-
ground/background time-frequency tiles can also be per-
formed [6]. Decorrelation approaches, however, only pro-
vide a mild stereo effect, with limited width, and cannot
spatially separate individual elements in the mix. To over-
come the latter, researchers have considered source sepa-
ration approaches [7–9]. The main idea is that, if individ-
ual elements or tracks are available, those can be panned
to any location, producing a more realistic spatial image.
Nevertheless, this approach presents several drawbacks:
ﬁrstly, even the best-performing source separation algo-
rithms produce artifacts [10], which can be highly audi-
ble in the stereo render; secondly, current separation algo-
rithms are very restrictive in the number and types of el-
ements they can separate [11], thus considerably limiting
their application in real-world spatialization tasks; thirdly,
after elements or tracks are separated, it remains to be seen
how can they be automatically panned in a realistic manner
(cf. [12]), which is the reason why separation-based ap-
proaches usually involve user intervention in the panning
stage [7–9].
Music is a paradigmatic example where, apart from
stereo capture, artists and engineers massively exploit the
stereo image to serve a creative artistic intent. Instrument
panning is a fundamental part of music mixing, and achiev-
ing the right balance requires musical sensibility as well as
technical knowledge [13]. However, apart from some style
conventions, the stereo image of a music mix is a highly
subjective construct: given a set of input tracks, there are
many plausible stereo renditions from which selecting the
ﬁnal mix is practically only a matter of artistic choice.
Hence, we posit that this is a perfect ground for modern
deep generative models [14]. However, to our surprise, we
only found one work using deep neural networks for mono-
to-stereo [15], with very limited generative capabilities.
In this work, we propose the use of machine learning
techniques and parametric stereo (PS) decoding [16,17] for
converting mono to stereo. PS is a coding technique that al-
lows to transmit a stereo signal through a mono signal plus
side information that, with enough bit rate, can be used to
recover an almost transparent version of the original stereo
content. By leveraging machine learning techniques, we
generate (or invent) plausible versions of PS parameters in
situations where side information is not available. These
304

parameters can then be used to decode an existing mono
signal into a plausible stereo one. We propose two variants
of PS generation: one based on a classical nearest neigh-
bor approach [18] and another one based on deep gener-
ative modeling. For the latter, we consider both common
autoregressive modeling [19] and more recent masked to-
ken modeling [20], and show that there can be noticeable
differences between the two. We use subjective testing to
compare the proposed approaches and show that PS gen-
eration can produce results that are more appealing than
considered competitive baselines. We also introduce two
objective evaluation metrics and discuss the limitations of
both PS and generative approaches for mono-to-stereo.
2. PARAMETRIC STEREO
PS exploits the perceptual cues that are more relevant to
our spatial perception of sound, namely the fact that direc-
tional sources produce interaural level and phase (or time
delay) differences, and the fact that diffuse sound ﬁelds
manifest as decorrelated signals at the two ears. These
cues effectively describe how a mono signal is mapped to
the left and right stereo channels, and can be measured us-
ing three quantities or parameters [16, 17]: interchannel
intensity differences (IID), interchannel time differences
(or, equivalently, phase differences), and interchannel co-
herence or correlation (IC). PS parameters are computed
in frequency bands, to reﬂect the frequency-dependent na-
ture of the spatial properties of stereo content, and also
on a frame-by-frame basis, to reﬂect the time-varying na-
ture of frequency cues and spatial images. An important
observation is that PS is capable of capturing spatial at-
tributes that are perceptually relevant and re-instate those
without changing signal levels, tonality, or other artifacts
that may arise from methods that operate on audio sig-
nals directly. In this work, for compactness and ease of
implementation, we choose to use the two-parameter ap-
proach by Breebaart et al. [17], which models IID and IC
without interchannel phase differences, accepting that this
two-parameter approach is not providing the best possible
quality of PS coding. We now overview this PS coding
strategy and introduce the main notation of the article.
2.1 Encoding
Given two complex-valued spectrograms expressed as
complex matrices X and Y, where rows represent fre-
quency bins and columns represent frames, we deﬁne the
band-based cross-spectrogram function
ρ(X, Y) = B (X ⊙Y∗),
where ⊙denotes elementwise multiplication, ∗denotes el-
ementwise complex conjugate, and B is a matrix with ones
and zeros that is used to sum frequency bins according
to a certain frequency band grouping (using matrix mul-
tiplication). In this work, we use the same spectrogram
settings and banding as in [17]: frames of 4,096 samples
for 44.1 kHz signals, 75% overlap, a Hann window, and
34 bands which are approximately distributed following
equivalent rectangular bandwidths.
Given the two complex spectrograms L and R corre-
sponding to the left and right channels of a stereo signal,
we can compute the IID using
PIID = 10 log10 (ρ(L, L) ⊘ρ(R, R)) ,
where ⊘denotes elementwise division. The IC is similarly
derived from the cross-spectrogram following
PIC = Re {ρ(L, R)} ⊘
p
ρ(L, L) ⊙ρ(R, R),
where Re{} extracts the real part of each complex value
and the square root is applied elementwise. Notice that
the use of the real part instead of the absolute value allows
to retain information on the relative phase of the two sig-
nals that would otherwise be lost. We ﬁnally quantize PIID
and PIC by discretizing each matrix element. To do so,
we use the same non-uniform quantization steps as in [17]:
31 steps for IID and 8 for IC. We denote the quantized ver-
sions as QIID and QIC.
To facilitate subsequent operation, and to prevent po-
tential prediction mismatches between IID and IC, we join
both parameters and treat them as one. For PIID and PIC,
we concatenate them in the frequency axis and form a sin-
gle matrix P. For QIID
i,j and QIC
i,j, we fuse them elementwise
into individual integers using the amount of IC quantiza-
tion steps. This way, Qi,j = 8 · QIID
i,j + QIC
i,j (note that
we can recover back QIID
i,j and QIC
i,j using the division and
modulo operators).
2.2 Decoding
To decode the above PS encoding, we perform a mixing
between the available mono signal and a decorrelated ver-
sion of it. We decorrelate a mono signal S by applying a
cascade of 4 inﬁnite impulse response all-pass ﬁlters and
obtain SD (this all-pass ﬁlter is an enhanced version of the
basic one proposed in [17] thanks to transient detection and
preservation, which avoids time smearing). After that, we
can decode the estimated left and right channels ˆL and ˆR
by carefully mixing S and SD. We can do so with
ˆL = Ma ⊙S + Mb ⊙SD,
ˆR = Mc ⊙S + Md ⊙SD,
using mixing matrices M, which are computed from the
coded PS parameters PIID and PIC. The exact calculation of
mixing matrices M is straightforward to obtain by adapting
to matrix notation the formulation in [17], to which we
refer for further detail and explanation.
3. PARAMETRIC STEREO GENERATION
We now explain the proposed approaches for PS genera-
tion. All of them share the above encoding-decoding for-
mulation, either using the quantized or unquantized ver-
sions. During training, stereo signals are used to compute
input downmixes S = (L+R)/2 and target PS parameters
P or Q (hence the proposed approaches aim at producing
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023
305

ˆP or ˆQ). Note that, in the case of the generative mod-
els we consider, one has to additionally input contextual
PS parameters in a teacher-forcing schema [21]. We also
want to note that, since they are quite common practice,
it is not in the scope of the current work to provide a de-
tailed explanation of existing generative models (instead,
we refer the interested reader to the cited references). In
all proposed approaches, we tune model hyperparameters
by qualitative manual inspection in a preliminary analysis
stage. PS speciﬁcations are predeﬁned and correspond to
the ones mentioned in Sec. 2. Neural network approaches
use Pytorch’s [22] defaults and are trained with Adam for
700 epochs using a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of
10−4, with warmup cosine scheduling.
3.1 Nearest neighbor
The ﬁrst approach proposes to impose the PS parameters
of existing, similar stereo fragments to individual mono
frames using a nearest neighbor (NN) algorithm [18]. We
call the approach PS-NN. The idea is to retrieve frame-
based PS parameters using mono frame sequences, and to
use the sequence of those retrieved parameters to decode
the mono input. At training time, we randomly select a
song, randomly extract an N = 20 frame spectrogram S
and its corresponding parameters P, and compute a key-
value vector pair (we here use the magnitude spectrogram).
The key vector is formed by framewise averaging the en-
ergy in each band,
k = 1
N
N
X
j=1
B S:,j,
(1)
and the value vector corresponds to the PS parameters of
the last frame, v = P:,N, which allows for a fully-causal
schema. We repeat the process half a million times and
store all pairs in a nearest neighbor structure. At test time,
for every frame of the input mono signal, we compute
an average as in Eq. 1, query the nearest neighbor struc-
ture, retrieve the ˆv vector of the closest neighbor (using
Euclidean distance), and assign it as the predicted PS pa-
rameter for that frame. This way, we obtain a sequence of
estimated PS parameters ˆP.
In preliminary analysis, we observed that PS-NN pro-
duced a high-rate ‘wobbling’ effect between left and right
(that is, panning was rapidly switching from one channel
to the other) and presented some temporal inconsistencies
(that is, sources were unrealistically moving with time,
even within one- or two-second windows). To counteract
these effects, we implemented a two step post-processing
based on (i) switching the sign of ˆPIID
:,j if the Euclidean dis-
tance to ˆPIID
:,j−1 was smaller, and (ii) applying an exponen-
tial smoothing on the columns of ˆP with a factor of 0.95.
This post-processing substantially reduced the aforemen-
tioned undesirable effects.
3.2 Autoregressive
The second approach proposes to model PS parameters
with a deep generative approach based on an autoregres-
sive (AR) transformer [19]. We call the approach PS-AR.
Our architecture is composed by 7 transformer encoder
blocks of 512 channels, with 16 heads and a multilayer per-
ceptron (MLPs) expansion factor of 3. We use sinusoidal
positional encoding at the input, and add a two-layer MLP
with an expansion factor of 2 at the output to project to
the ﬁnal number of classes (which is 31×8 tokens times
34 bands per frame, see Sec. 2.1). The input is formed by
a projection of the mono spectrogram S and the teacher-
forcing information Q into a 512-channel activation H,
H = ϕ(S) +
B
X
i=1
ξi(Qi,:),
(2)
where ϕ is a two-layer MLP with an expansion factor of 2,
B = 34 is the number of bands, and ξi is a learnable per-
band token embedding (which includes the mask token,
see below). We train the model with weighted categorical
cross-entropy, using the weight
w = 1 + λσ

PIID
±ϵ

+ σ(PIC),
(3)
calculated independently for every element in the batch.
In Eq. 3, σ(X) corresponds to the elementwise standard
deviation of X, λ = 0.15 compensates for different mag-
nitudes, [ ]±ϵ corresponds to the clipping operation, and
ϵ = 20 is a threshold to take into account the little per-
ceptual relevance of IIDs larger than 20 dB [23]. In pre-
liminary analysis, we observed that using w qualitatively
improved results, as it shall promote focus on wider stereo
images and more difﬁcult cases.
PS-AR follows a PixelSNAIL recursive approach [24],
starting with the prediction of lower frequency bands, then
higher frequency bands, and moving into the next frame
once all bands are predicted. To efﬁciently exploit the past
context, all input sequences have full-sequence teacher-
forcing except for the upper frequency bands of the last
frame, which are masked consecutively and uniformly at
random during training [24]. At test time, we sample re-
cursively, following the same masking strategy and using
a temperature hyperparameter τ = 0.9. In addition, we
employ classiﬁer-free guidance [25] with a hyperparam-
eter γ = 0.25. For that, we use the approach in [26],
which modiﬁes the conditional logits Ucond with uncondi-
tional ones Uuncond such that
U = (1 + γ)Ucond −γUuncond.
(4)
To have both a conditional and an unconditional model
within the same architecture, following common practice,
we randomly replace ϕ(S) in Eq. 2 by a learnable dropout
token 10% of the time.
3.3 Masked token modeling
The third approach proposes to model PS parameters with
a deep generative approach based on masked token mod-
eling (MTM) [20]. We call the approach PS-MTM. The
architecture, loss, inputs, and outputs of the model are the
same as in PS-AR, including the cross-entropy weights
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023
306

(Eq. 3) and classiﬁer-free guidance (Eq. 4). The only dif-
ference is the masking approach and the sampling proce-
dure, which implies different hyperparameters for the test-
ing stage (we use τ = 4.5 and γ = 0.75, but now the tem-
perature τ has a different meaning as explained below).
MTM generates patch representations Q with quantized
elements Qi,j which are dubbed as tokens (in our case the
matrix Q has dimensions B × N, with N being the num-
ber of considered audio frames; the maximum number of
tokens in Qi,j is 31×8, as deﬁned in Sec. 2.1). During
training, the teacher-forcing input Q is masked uniformly
at random, and only the ground truth elements correspond-
ing to the masked positions are used to compute the cross-
entropy loss at the output. The number of elements to mask
is also selected at random following a cosine schedule [20]
(this speciﬁcally includes the case where all patch elements
are masked). During sampling, patch representations are
formed with 50% overlap, using no masking for the ﬁrst
half of the patch, similar to [26].
MTM sampling is an iterative process that achieves or-
ders of magnitude speedups compared to autoregressive
modeling (in our case PS-MTM uses 20 steps for a 3 s hop,
while PS-AR requires B = 34 steps for just a single au-
dio frame of a few milliseconds). MTM iteratively sam-
ples a masked patch, performs predictions with classiﬁer-
free guidance [26], chooses the predictions with the high-
est logit score for the next iteration (they will become un-
masked and ﬁxed), and reduces the percent of masked to-
kens following the same scheduling as in training until no
masked elements remain [20]. Differently from training,
the masking used in sampling is not random, but based
on logit scores (lowest ones become masked), and noise
is added to logit scores to promote diversity [20, 26]. In
our case, we employ Gaussian noise with zero mean and
a standard deviation τ, which becomes our redeﬁned tem-
perature parameter.
4. EVALUATION
To train and evaluate all approaches we use a collection
of professionally-recorded stereo music tracks at 44.1 kHz.
We consider 419,954 tracks for training and 10 k for eval-
uation, and randomly extract a 10 s chunk from each track.
During training, we sample 6 s patches from those and per-
form data augmentation using a random gain and also ran-
domly switching left and right channels.
4.1 Baselines: regression and decorrelation
In addition to the original stereo and its mono downmix,
we consider two additional baselines to compare with the
previous approaches. The ﬁrst baseline corresponds to an
ablation of the deep generative approaches, and tries to an-
swer the question of whether a generative component is
needed or convenient for the task. Thus, the baseline con-
sists of a neural network with the exact same conﬁguration
as PS-AR or PS-MTM, but substituting the generative part
by standard regression with mean-squared error [18]. We
term this baseline PS-Reg, and note that it could be con-
sidered an enhanced modern version of the approach of
Chun et al. [15], using PS.
It is interesting to mention that, in preliminary analysis,
we observed that PS-Reg accurately estimated IC values,
but consistently failed to predict IIDs. The predicted IIDs
had minimal deviation from zero, which can be attributed
to the probability distribution function of IID values be-
ing centered around zero with equally plausible deviations
to the right and to the left. This was an early indication
that the one-to-many mapping of IID prediction cannot be
correctly handled by regression methods, and that the task
would be better served by a generative approach.
The second baseline we consider corresponds to a vari-
ant of classical decorrelation approaches. Here, the decor-
relation is implemented by means of an all-pass ﬁlter
network enhanced by (i) detection and preservation of
transients, and (ii) a frequency-dependent mix between
original and decorrelated signals to achieve a frequency-
dependent IC. We term this baseline Decorr, and we note
that it could be considered an improved modern version of
the approaches [1–6].
4.2 Objective measures
To the best of our knowledge, there are no objective mea-
surements for plausible stereo renderings nor suitable PS
prediction scores. Due to the highly creative/subjective na-
ture of the task, common error measurements may not be
appropriate. Therefore, as a way of measuring progress,
we propose to use a couple of metrics inspired from the lit-
erature on generative modeling (cf. [14]). The ﬁrst metric
we consider is the minimum error on a large sample basis,
Emin. Given a large sample of generated PS parameters
(K = 128 for a single audio excerpt), Emin chooses the
minimum error with respect to the ground truth:
Emin = min
k

X
i,j
δ

Pi,j, ˆP
(k)
i,j


,
where δ is a suitable error function. The idea is that if we
allow the model to generate many samples for every input,
in the limit of very large K one of them should come close
to the ground truth. For PS parameters, we use absolute
errors, weight the IID to compensate magnitudes with IC,
and take into account some perceptual relevance for IID as
in Sec. 3.2 and Eq. 3:
δ(x, y) =
(
λ |[x]±ϵ −[y]±ϵ|
for IID,
|x −y|
for IC.
The second metric we consider is the Fréchet distance
on the PS parameter space, DF. Given a pool of PS param-
eters P and a K times larger pool of generated parameters
ˆP, assuming Gaussian distributions, DF is computed as
DF =
µ(P) −µ( ˆP)

2
+
+ Tr

σ(P) + σ( ˆP) −2
q
σ(P)σ( ˆP)

,
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023
307

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Preference
African2
Electro1
Jazz1
Latin3
Rap1
Rock1
Soul2
All items
Mono
PS-Reg
Decorr
PS-AR
PS-NN
PS-MTM
Stereo
Figure 1. Preference results for the items included in the subjective test (Sec. 4.3). Markers indicate average values and
vertical bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval associated to them.
where Tr{} denotes the matrix trace and µ and σ corre-
spond to the mean vector and the covariance matrix over
frames, respectively. The Fréchet distance has become a
standard measure in generative modeling where, instead
of the PS parameters used here, activations of pre-trained
classiﬁcation networks are used. We will see that it is also
able to provide some informative cues in our task (Sec. 5).
4.3 Subjective evaluation
Given the creative/subjective nature of the task, the best
way to measure performance is through subjective testing.
In this study, we ran a preference test with 24 listeners on
7 song excerpts of 10 s from the test set. To select those ex-
cerpts, we ranked the test excerpts based on w (Eq. 3) and
randomly selected them from the top quartile. When do-
ing so, we manually veriﬁed that the selected excerpts cov-
ered distinct musical genres and ensured that a PS-decoded
version did not exhibit signiﬁcant coding degradation (this
way, we prime the listener to focus on the stereo image
instead of potential artifacts introduced by our implemen-
tation of PS, Sec. 2).
The test consisted in providing a rating between 0 and
100 to 7 approaches: the three proposed ones, the two
baselines, the mono downmix, and the original stereo sig-
nal (professional mix, non-coded). Mono and stereo sig-
nals provide us with intuitive bounds for the analysis of
preference, and also serve us to discard non-expert lis-
teners.
Indeed, we found that the task is quite hard
for non-experts, who provided many inconsistent ratings
when asked to evaluate an appropriate balance between
the width and the clarity of the mix. We used the most
obvious of those inconsistencies to discard listeners from
the test, namely the fact that they rated mono (input) over
stereo (professional mix) in one or more occasions. Half
of the users (12) did not incur into such inconsistency
and were considered reliable enough to derive conclusions
from their ratings. To compensate for differences in sub-
jective scales, we normalized excerpt preference tuples
between 0 and 1 (that is, we normalized the ratings for
the 7 approaches independently per audio excerpt and lis-
tener). To measure statistical signiﬁcance, we used pair-
wise Wilcoxon signed-rank tests and applied the Holm-
Bonferroni adjustment for multiple testing with p = 0.05.
The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is appropriate for our case
as it is non-parametric and designed for matched samples.
5. RESULTS
In Fig. 1 we depict the average listener preference for each
item and approach. Initially, we see that the pattern differs
depending on the test item. For some items, the proposed
approaches are preferred over the baselines (e.g., Electro1,
Jazz1, and Latin3) while, for some other items, differences
between approaches are less clear (e.g., Rock1 and Soul2).
All approaches seem to be preferred above the mono sig-
nal, except for baseline approaches with Electro1. Notice-
ably, in some situations, preference for some of the pro-
posed approaches even overlaps with the original stereo
(e.g., Electro1, Latin3, and Soul2).
The case of Soul2
shows an example where considered approaches are al-
most as preferred as the original stereo, whereas the case
of Jazz1 shows an example where considered approaches
are still far from the professional mix.
Despite the different preferences on individual excerpts,
upon further inspection we see that a clear pattern emerges
when considering all items: proposed approaches rank bet-
ter than mono and the considered baselines (Fig. 1, right).
In Table 1 we conﬁrm that, on average, PS-AR is preferred
over the baseline approaches and that, in turn, PS-NN and
PS-MTM are preferred over PS-AR. In Table 2, we report
statistically signiﬁcant differences beetween PS-NN/PS-
MTM and the baseline approaches, but not between PS-AR
and the baseline approaches (and neither between PS-AR
and PS-NN/PS-MTM nor between PS-NN and PS-MTM).
Overall, the results show that a generative approach to PS
prediction can become a compelling system for mono-to-
stereo. The performance of PS-NN is a nice surprise that
was not predicted by the objective metrics, which other-
wise seem to correlate with listener preference (Table 1;
perhaps PS-NN does not follow the trend because it is not
a generative approach).
Besides quality, another aspect worth considering is
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023
308

Approach
Emin ↓
DF ↓
Preference ↑
Mono
0.104
20.89
0.090 ± 0.042
PS-Reg
0.069
8.11
0.451 ± 0.066
Decorr
0.093
8.32
0.457 ± 0.064
PS-AR
0.074
0.62
0.527 ± 0.060
PS-NN
0.089
3.08
0.582 ± 0.057
PS-MTM
0.068
0.59
0.608 ± 0.050
Stereo
0.000
0.03
0.908 ± 0.042
Table 1. Results for the objective (Emin, DF) and subjec-
tive (Preference ± 95% conﬁdence interval) evaluations.
PS-Reg Decorr PS-AR PS-NN PS-MTM Stereo
Mono
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
PS-Reg
✗
✗
✓
✓
✓
Decorr
✗
✓
✓
✓
PS-AR
✗
✗
✓
PS-NN
✗
✓
PS-MTM
✓
Table 2. Pairwise statistical signiﬁcance for the case of all
test items (12 subjects times 7 excerpts, see Sec. 4.3). The
obtained p-value threshold is 0.0053.
speed. In Table 3 we observe that PS-AR, as anticipated,
is orders of magnitude slower than the other approaches, to
the point of making it impractical for real-world operation.
Decorr, PS-Reg, and PS-NN are faster than real-time on
CPU and PS-MTM is not. However, one should note that
with PS-MTM we can easily trade off sampling iterations
at the expense of some quality reduction (see [20, 26]).
PS-NN may dramatically improve speed if we consider
the use of fast nearest neighbor search algorithms or even
hash tables, which make this approach very interesting for
real-world deployment (note we deliberately made PS-NN
comparable in size to the other approaches, see Table 3).
6. DISCUSSION
Despite the good results obtained above, the subjective test
reveals that, for some of the considered excerpts, there is
still a gap between professional stereo mixes and the pro-
posed approaches. We hypothesize that this gap is due to
(i) limitations of the considered PS encoding, and (ii) the
difﬁculty of the task itself. Regarding (i), we suspect that
part of the low subjective scores of PS-based approaches is
due to the audio distortions and tonal artifacts introduced
by the PS decoding. Thus, we hypothesize that using a
commercial implementation of PS coding (or perhaps even
learning end-to-end the coding operation) could yield bet-
ter results. Besides, we think that the fact that PS is deﬁned
in a banded domain poses a challenge to PS generation ap-
proaches, namely that individual bands are panned but ap-
proaches do not have an explicit notion of instrument or
‘entity’. Indeed, we sometimes observe individual entities
being panned into two different positions simultaneously
(e.g., for the same instrument, we may get some frequen-
cies panned to the left and some to the right, which is an
uncommon stylistic decision). A potential solution to this
Approach
Learnable
RTF ↓
parameters
CPU
GPU
Decorr
0
0.25
n/a
PS-Reg
30.1 M
0.32
0.21
PS-NN
34.0 M†
0.82
n/a
PS-MTM
34.5 M
5.81
0.33
PS-AR
34.5 M
255.87
8.38
Table 3. Number of learnable parameters and average real-
time factor (RTF). Superscript † indicates an estimation
of 0.5 M key-value pairs with B = 34 bands (Sec. 3.1).
RTFs are measured on a Xeon(R) 2.20 GHz CPU and on a
GeForce GTX 1080-Ti GPU.
problem could be to add better (or more) inputs to the mod-
els, together with more capacity, with the hope that they
achieve a better understanding of what is a source before
panning it. Along this line, it would be perhaps interesting
to include some techniques used in the context of source
separation with neural network models [11]. Regarding
(ii), another issue we sometimes observe is with the tem-
poral consistency of panning decisions, with an instrument
appearing predominantly in one channel but then moving
(without much artistic criterion) to the other channel after
10 or 20 s. Handling temporal consistency is a transversal
problem across all generative models, typically handled by
brute force (that is, more receptive ﬁeld and/or larger mod-
els) or by some form of hierarchical or recurrent process-
ing. Nonetheless, it is still an open issue, especially in the
case of really long sequences like audio and music.
In addition to the limitations inherent to the technol-
ogy, there are also some shortcomings in the test method-
ology. The subjective tests were conducted using head-
phones, whereas stereo images are typically created and
mixed in a studio using professional loudspeaker monitor-
ing. This implies that when critically evaluating the pro-
posed approaches on a professional setup, additional sub-
tleties might be discernible. Another methodological chal-
lenge was that often users had difﬁculty in evaluating mul-
tiple test excerpts according to the stated evaluation crite-
ria. A potentially contributing factor to it was the absence
of a standardized test methodology for multiple preference
testing without a reference.
7. CONCLUSION
In this work we study methods to convert from mono to
stereo. Our proposal entails (i) the use of PS for mono
to stereo upmixing and (ii) the synthesis of PS parame-
ters with three machine learning methods.
We also in-
troduce (iii) the use of modern generative approaches to
the task and propose two variants of them. We addition-
ally (iv) overview and adapt an existing PS methodology
and (v) propose two tentative objective metrics to evaluate
stereo renderings. The three proposed approaches outper-
form the classical and the deep neural network baselines
we consider, and two of such approaches stand out with a
statistically signiﬁcant difference in the subjective test.
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023
309

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all the participants of the listening test for their
input and Gautam Bhattacharya and Samuel Narváez for
preliminary discussions on the topic.
9. REFERENCES
[1] M. R. Schroeder, “An artiﬁcial stereophonic effect ob-
tained from a single audio signal,” Journal of the Audio
Engineering Society, vol. 6, no. 2, p. 74–79, 1958.
[2] B. B. Bauer, “Some techniques toward better stereo-
phonic perspective,” IEEE Trans. on Audio, vol. 11, p.
88–92, 1963.
[3] R. Orban, “A rational technique for synthesizing
pseudo-stereo from monophonic sources,” Journal of
the Audio Engineering Society, vol. 18, no. 2, p.
157–164, 1970.
[4] C. Faller, “Pseudostereophony revisited,” in Proc. of
the Audio Engineering Society Conv. (AES), 2005, p.
118.
[5] M. Fink,
S. Kraft,
and U. Zölzer,
“Downmix-
compatible conversion from mono to stereo in time-
and frequency-domain,” in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on
Digital Audio Effects (DAFx), 2015.
[6] C. Uhle and P. Gampp, “Mono-to-stereo upmixing,” in
Proc. of the Audio Engineering Society Conv. (AES),
2016, p. 140.
[7] M. Lagrange, L. G. Martins, and G. Tzanetakis, “Semi-
automatic mono to stereo up-mixing using sound
source formation,” in Proc. of the Audio Engineering
Society Conv. (AES), 2007, p. 122.
[8] D. Fitzgerald, “Upmixing from mono - A source sep-
aration approach,” in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Digital
Signal Processing (DSP), 2011.
[9] A. Delgado Castro and J. Szymanski, “Semi-automatic
mono-to-stereo upmixing
via
separation
of note
events,” in Proc. of the AES Conf. on Immersive and
Interactive Audio, 2019, p. 12.
[10] J. Pons, S. Pascual, G. Cengarle, and J. Serrà, “Up-
sampling artifacts in neural audio synthesis,” in Proc.
of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 2021, p. 3005–3009.
[11] E. Cano, D. FitzGerald, A. Liutkus, M. D. Plumbley,
and F.-R. Stöter, “Musical source separation: An intro-
duction,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 36,
no. 1, pp. 31–40, 2018.
[12] C. J. Steinmetz, J. Pons, S. Pascual, and J. Serrà, “Au-
tomatic multitrack mixing with a differentiable mixing
console of neural audio effects,” in Proc. of the IEEE
Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2021, p. 7175.
[13] D. Gibson, The art of mixing: a visual guide to record-
ing, engineering, and production, 2nd ed.
Fairview,
USA: ArtistPRO, 2005.
[14] J. M. Tomczak, Deep generative modeling. New York,
USA: Springer Charm, 2022.
[15] C. J. Chun, S. H. Jeong, S. Y. Park, and H. K. Kim,
“Extension of monaural to stereophonic sound based
on deep neural networks,” in Proc. of the Audio Engi-
neering Society Conv. (AES), 2015, p. 139.
[16] H. Purnhagen, “Low complexity parametric stereo cod-
ing in MPEG-4,” in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Digital
Audio Effects (DAFx), 2004, p. 163–168.
[17] J. Breebaart, S. van de Par, A. Kohlrausch, and
E. Schuijers, “Parametric coding of stereo audio,”
EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing,
vol. 2005, no. 9, p. 1305–1322, 2005.
[18] T. Hastie and R. Tibshirani, The elements of statisti-
cal learning: data mining, inference, and prediction,
2nd ed.
New York, USA: Springer, 2009.
[19] A. Radford,
K. Narashiman,
T. Salimans,
and
I. Sutskever, “Improving language understanding by
generative pre-training,” Technical Report, OpenAI,
2018.
[20] H. Chang, H. Zhang, L. Jiang, C. Liu, and W. T.
Freeman, “MaskGIT: masked generative image trans-
former,” in Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022,
p. 11315–11325.
[21] R. J. Williams and D. Zipser, “A learning algorithm for
continually running fully recurrent neural networks,”
Neural Computation, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 270–280, 1989.
[22] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Brad-
bury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein,
L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito,
M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner,
L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala, PyTorch: an imper-
ative style, high-performance deep learning library.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, vol. 32, p. 8024–8035.
[23] B. Bartlett, Stereo microphone techniques.
London,
UK: Focal Press, 1991.
[24] X. I. Chen, N. Mishra, M. Rohaninejad, and P. Abbeel,
“PixelSNAIL: an improved autoregressive generative
model,” in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Machine learning
(ICML), 2018, p. 864–872.
[25] J. Ho and T. Salimans, “Classiﬁer-free diffusion guid-
ance,” in Proc. of the NeurIPS Workshop on Deep Gen-
erative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.
[26] H. Chang, H. Zhang, J. Barber, A. J. Maschinot,
J. Lezama, L. Jiang, M.-H. Yang, K. Murphy, W. T.
Freeman, M. Rubinstein, Y. Li, and D. Krishnan,
“Muse: text-to-image generation via masked genera-
tive transformers,” ArXiv: 2301.00704, 2023.
Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023
310
