Singing melody extraction is a challenging task that aims to detect and identify the fundamental frequency (F0) of singing voice in polyphonic music recordings. This task is more complicated than the monophonic pitch detection task due to the presence of various instrumental accompaniments and background noises, making it more difficult to accurately extract the singing melody. Singing melody extraction is not only crucial for music analysis by itself, but also has many downstream applications, such as cover song identification , singing evaluation , and music recommendation .
Deep neural networks have been widely adopted in the singing melody extraction task to produce promising performance in terms of extraction accuracy. Early models simply leveraged deep neural networks (DNN) and convolutional neural networks (CNN) . In more recent models, musical and structural priors were incorporated to improve performance. These include MSNet with a vocal detection component at the encoder-decoder bottleneck, joint detection model setting up an auxiliary network, and TONet with tone-octave predictions. Additionally, models can capture frequency relationships better with multi-dilation , cross-attention networks , graph-based neural networks , or harmonic constant-Q transform (HCQT) .
One of our observations relates to the input representations of the models, which play an important role in affecting the extraction performance. Timbre, which is closely related to harmonics, is one of the key components that helps models distinguish the vocal from other instruments. When the CFP representation is chosen as the input representation, its second feature, the generalized cepstrum, allows the model to learn the strength of harmonics of any given fundamental frequency in a localized manner. However, in music, the harmonics of a single sound usually decays rapidly along the frequency axis (detail in section 2.1), which can pose a challenge for the model to distinguish sounds that only differ significantly at the trailing harmonics.
The transformation from the spectrum to the generalized cepstrum in CFP is a Fourier transform, and hence mostly captures the first few peaks with large magnitudes. As a result, this representation is not helpful in sensing the trailing harmonics. This motivates us to apply a different transformation function that produces a generalized cepstrum with better harmonics sensitivity.
Another observation relates to the vocal detection component. Extremely short vocal segments surrounded by non-vocal regions, and vice versa, rarely occur since vocalists typically sing a melody for at least half a second or rest for at least a few hundred milliseconds. Thresholdbased removal , mean or median filtering [17, 18] and Viterbi-based smoothing [19, 20] are frequently used to address the problem. When they are implemented alongside a network-based algorithm, however, the network remains unaware of our smoothing intention and configuration. To investigate whether such awareness can increase the prediction performance, we derive a differentiable loss component that specifically penalizes spurious short-term predictions of these kinds during training, thus potentially guiding the model to produce consistently stable predictions.
In this paper, we propose two techniques that attempt to improve the two concerns mentioned above, namely the harmonic sensitivity and the prediction stability of singing melody extraction models. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose to use exponentially growing sinusoids along the frequency axis to transform the spectrum into the generalized cepstrum of the CFP representation. This approach is equivalent to taking a ztransform instead of Fourier transform, which increases the harmonic sensitivity of the input.
• We design a differentiable loss function as part of the training objective to teach the network to avoid predicting unrealistically short sequences of vocal and non-vocal at the voice detection bin.
• We evaluate our techniques by applying them on several melody extraction models. Additionally, we adapt PianoNet , originally developed for piano transcription, into the melody extraction task. Experimental results demonstrate state-of-the-art performance of our improved models.
In this section, we introduce three main parts of our methodology. First, we propose a modified CFP representation, z-CFP, to enhance the harmonic sensitivity of the network input. Second, we introduce extraction models used for evaluating our techniques, namely MSNet, FTANet, and PianoNet. Third, we propose a new loss function as part of training objective to improve the prediction stability of models.
Our input representation of audio data is a modified version of the CFP representation. A CFP representation X ∈ R 3×T ×F contains three features, with T the length of time frames and F the number of frequency bins. At each time slice, it contains: (1) a power spectrum S ∈ R 1×F ;
(2) a generalized cepstrum GC ∈ R 1×F ; and (3) a generalized cepstrum of spectrum GCoS ∈ R 1×F , As illustrated in the upper part of Figure 1 , the standard CFP generation process begins by computing the framewise spectrum of an input audio waveform using shorttime Fourier transform (STFT). We then obtain the magnitude of each spectrum, which serves as the first feature of CFP, denoted as S. To derive the second feature, we compute the generalized cepstrum using the following equation:
where F and F -1 denotes the Fourier transform and its inverse, s γ : R → R is an element-wise applied, logarithmlike modification function as described in , and the absolute value sign represents an element-wise complex norm operation. The second equality comes directly from the fact that norm of a complex number equals to that of its conjugate.
As mentioned in the introduction, GC is not sensitive to the trailing harmonic dynamics, as it mostly captures the first few peaks with large magnitudes. Since the harmonics decay rapidly along with the frequency axis, we shall revert the decay to better preserve such dynamics. In other words, instead of applying complex sinusoids n s γ (S[n])e -iwn as in Fourier transform (n is the entry of frequency bins in S), we apply growing complex sinusoids n s γ (S[n])e (k-iw)n , where k ∈ R and k > 0. This is equivalent to taking a discrete z-transform n s γ (S[n])z -n , where z = e iw-k . In the actual implementation, k is manually assigned and fixed across different w. Therefore, as illustrated in Figure 1 , we can separate the computation of k part and w part as follows:
In the lower part of Figure 1 , we present S of an audio waveform with different values of k. We can observe that the harmonics of S at the tail gets amplified so that the subsequent Fourier transform can better capture their dynamics. While we observe some amplifications of harmonics at frequencies other than the fundamental frequencies, their magnitudes are always smaller than those of nearby fundamental frequencies. Therefore, they pose no sufficient distraction for the extraction model, as long as the chosen k is not too large. In our experiments, we set k = 0.0006.
We then generate the generalized cepstrum of spectrum GCoS from cepstrum GC the same way as in the original CFP. Finally, each time slice of our modified CFP representation X ∈ R 3×T ×F consists of {S, GC, GCoS} with log-scaled frequency axis. For the rest of the paper, we denote it z-CFP.
Our extraction models are referred from three state-ofthe-art (SoTA) models, MSNet , FTANet , and Pi-anoNet . Different from MSNet and FTANet, Pi-anoNet is the SoTA model of piano transcription. Given its superior performance on piano transcription, we incorporate a sub-network of PianoNet into singing melody extraction, as we hypothesize that it may also yield good results for melody extraction.
MSNet contains a 3-layer encoder, a 3-layer decoder, and a bottleneck module. The channel size is shifted as 3 → 32 → 64 → 128 → 64 → 32 → 1. The bottleneck module maps the encoder output to a 1-channel featuremap for voice detection. All 2D-convolutional layers come with (5 × 5) kernel size. FTANet contains a 4-layer encoder, a 3-layer decoder, and a 4-layer bottleneck module. Both encoder and decoder contain FTA-modules and SF-modules to process the audio latent features. The channel size is shifted from 3 to 128, then back to 1. More specifications of MSNet and FTANet can be found in their papers [8, 12] .
The PianoNet we use for this task is modified from a sub-network of . It starts with four convolutional blocks, each block containing two 2D-convolutional layers with kernel sizes (3, 5) and (3, 3) respectively, a batch normalization layer and a ReLU activation. Then it is followed by bidirectional-GRU and softmax layers, with dense layers as transitions. The layer bias is turned off for all layers before the Bi-GRU.
Figure 2 illustrates a more detailed structure of the three extraction models. Following the pipeline, we first process the audio waveform into z-CFP representations. Then we feed them into the extraction model, which produces output feature maps Ỹ ∈ R T ×(F +1) . The additional one feature along the frequency axis denotes the voice detection bin output. It is then compared against the ground truth label Y ∈ R T ×(F +1) , through the loss function introduced in the following section.
We add two differentiable training objectives, L v and L nv , to the conventional binary cross entropy loss L BCE to teach the extraction model to avoid unrealistically short vocal and non-vocal sequences at the vocal detection bin. Since the design for these two cases are symmetric, we first introduce the loss object L v , for the vocal case.
As shown on the top of Figure 3 , the predictions at the vocal detection bin is a time series {a 1 , a 2 , ..., a T }. First, since our training objectives are dealing with certain types of short burst segments of vocal and non-vocal, we extract all possible subsequences, with stride 1. For example, for 3-length subsequences we have {a 1:3 , a 2:4 , ..., a T -2:T }, and similarly {a 1:4 , a 2:5 , ..., a T -3:T } for subsequences of length 4, etc.
Second, to simplify the problem a bit at the beginning, we assume that the voice detection output is binary valued a ∈ {0, 1}. Formally, we do not want "sharp-burst" sequences inside the following set:
where M v is a hyperparameter threshold, above which the duration of vocal segments becomes reasonable. Figure 3 illustrates examples of "sharp-burst" sequences in B v (and B nv ) as red segments inside black-border boxes.
Suppose m = 3, all possible binary sequences are {000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, 111} and 010 ∈ B v . To make the model avoid predicting the short burst vocal Proceedings of the 24th ISMIR Conference, Milan, Italy, November 5-9, 2023 segment, i.e., 010, we construct a polynomial objective that can fulfill the goal by satisfying the following:
1 where a1a2a3 = 010 0 otherwise (
A decent choice will then be
which can be easily extended to sequences with longer length m.
However, there is a small caveat in this extension when we move back from binary values to probability values a ∈ [0, 1]. For example, our loss component will be having trouble capturing sequences like {0.1, 0.4, 0.6, 0.1} and {0.1, 0.6, 0.4, 0.1} as both L foot_3 v and L 4 v result in relatively small values. However, we observe that polynomials
respectively works better than our original L 4 v , but still insufficient to work standalone.
Since none of the polynomials above gives high values to sequences outside of B v in 4-length, a simple solution would be to redefine L 4 v to be the sum of all such polynomials:
This redefined loss L v allows better recognition of the bad sequences mentioned above while not falsely flagging sequences outside of B v . Furthermore, when dealing with longer sequences, for example {0.1, 0.9, ..., 0.9, 0.1} with increasingly many 0.9s in the middle, the original L v 's output quickly diminishes while the redefined L v does not.
This redefined objective does come with a small side effect, as it over-counts the shorter bad sequences. For example, (0.1, 0.9, 0.1, 0.1) now gets a high loss value not only in L 3 v , but also in L 4 v . However, we believe this side effect does not have significant impact as it does not matter whether neural network decides to stop producing shorter bad sequences or longer bad sequences first.
A further improvement is to pass the value of L m v into the S-curve function:
where r ∈ R and r > 1. It will amplify those sequences that receive loss values closer to 1 and suppress those sequences with loss values closer to 0.
Finally, for each m ∈ [3, M v ], we compute L m v across all m-length subsequences in the model's output. The aggregated loss function L v is then computed by concatenating all these L m v arrays and taking the average. Now analogously, assuming non-vocal sequences beyond length M nv become reasonable, we can the same analysis on the following set of sequences:
and consequently obtain L nv . Practically, L m nv of any sequence a 1 ...a m can be computed as L m v of the flipped sequence b 1 ...b m , where b i = 1a i for all i ∈ {1..m}. Our final loss function will then be:
3. EXPERIMENTS
For the training data, we complied with the setting of [10, 12] and chose all 1000 Chinese pop songs from MIR-1K 1 and 35 vocal tracks from MedleyDB . For the testing data, we chose 12 tracks in ADC2004 and 9 tracks in MIREX05 foot_2 . We also selected 12 tracks from Med-leyDB that are disjoint from those already used for training.
For the signal processing part, we used 8000 Hz sampling rate to process audio tracks. We use a window size of 768, a hop size of 80 to compute the STFT of audio tracks. Note that the time resolution of our labels is 0.01 seconds, and this hop size was chosen to match that. Then, when creating z-CFP representations, we set the time dimension of the representation to be T = 128, or 1.28 seconds, and the number of frequency bins F = 360, or 60 bins per octave across 6 octaves. The start and stop frequencies are 32.5 Hz and 2050 Hz. Hence, the input shape becomes X ∈ R 3×128×360 and the output/label shape becomes Y ∈ R 128×361 .
Within the extra loss component, we set the duration threshold of vocal segments M v = 30 (0.3 seconds), the duration threshold of non-vocal segments M nv = 7 (0.07 seconds), and the S-curve exponent parameter r = 5.
For the training hyperparameters, we use a batch size of 10, the Adam optimizer with a fixed learning rate of 1 × 10 -4 . The maximum training epoch is 500. During the evaluation, we use the standard metrics of the singing melody extraction task, namely, voice recall (VR), voicing false alarm (VFA), raw pitch accuracy (RPA), raw chroma accuracy (RCA), and overall accuracy (OA) from the mir_eval library . Following the convention of this task, overall accuracy (OA) is regarded as the most important metric. All models are trained and tested in NVIDIA RTX 2080Ti GPUs and implemented in Py-Torch 3 1 . Ablation studies on ADC2004, MIREX05 and MedleyDB testsets. Baselines use CFP as the input representation and L BCE as the loss function. {L v , L nv } denotes the use of our proposed loss function in section 2.3. Among median filter sizes in the range [3, 100] ⊂ Z, 3 point works best for MedleyDB, 7 point works best for MIREX 05, and 15 point works best for ADC 2004. But they neither significantly outperform our proposed loss component in any single dataset, nor uniformly outperform in all three datasets.
Table 2 presents the results as we compare our best model, i.e., PianoNet with z-transform and {L v , L nv }, with other SoTA models. Among these SoTAs, there are two models with "*", indicating that these are only partial comparisons. For SpecTNT , since there is no official open-source implementation, we report its results based on our own reimplementation. For H-GNN , we directly copied its reported performance from the original paper.
From Table 2 , our improved PianoNet with z-transform and {L v , L nv } yield the best OA performance over all datasets, the best RPA and RCA on ADC 2004 and MIREX 05 datasets. We do note, despite the use of the extra loss component, that our model's VFA is not necessarily the smallest. This is because the extra loss component only targets a particular type of false positive, and is not meant to minimize the false positive rate in general. For example, sometimes the network's vocal to non-vocal transition happens later than the reference labels. In this case, since the vocal sequence itself lasts long enough, the extra loss component will not mark this type of false positives. Addressing this type of errors is potentially a future work.
Another thing we found is that the PianoNet, as one of SoTAs in the piano transcription task and ported by us to the melody extraction task in this paper, has already yields very high performance on MIREX 05 dataset. This indicates that there may exist more powerful network architectures for this task yet to be explored. 1 , our techniques could help models other than PianoNet achieve higher performance than their original versions.
To empirically verify if applying the polynomial loss functions L v and L nv could reduce the voice detection errors, i.e., short burst segments of vocal and non-vocal, we visualize two types of plots in Figure 4 . The top three plots demonstrate the loss values of L 30 v between the original extraction models and the improved models with L v and L nv , across the entire MIREX05 dataset (i.e., we concatenate all tracks in the dataset). We see that cases in which the improved models' prediction receive loss values close to 1 diminishes comparing to those of the original models. This phenomenon implies that after applying L v and L nv , the chance of models to predict short burst segments The pair of plots in the last row compares the prediction performance of PianoNets, trained without and with the extra loss components, on a zoomed-in section of MIREX05. Note that the original PianoNet has a short burst non-vocal segment in between the 10th second and 11th second. Further, it has a considerable number of short burst vocal segments around the 12th second. Once trained with the extra loss components, these issues are resolved. Also note that both the original version and the improved version make a mistake in between the 13th and the 14th second. This is because the length of that non-vocal transition is greater than our threshold M nv , which ends up not triggering L nv . All these observations further verify the effectiveness of our proposed loss components.
In this paper, we propose two techniques to respectively utilize the two assumptions we made for improving the performance of singing melody extraction models. First, comparing to Fourier transform, the use of z-transform in generating cepstrum allows the network to better recognize the strength of harmonics of any fundamental frequencies. Empirically, while the trailing harmonics of those frequencies that do not actually appear in the audio also get elevated, the benefit of the technique is greater than its setback. Second, our extra loss components make the network less prone to predict vocal and non-vocal sequences are unreasonably short, while not affecting the network's overall accuracy due to its differentiability. Along with different extraction models, we achieve better performance when compared to their original version and other state-ofthe-art models. We regard these two techniques as decent improvements on singing melody extraction models.