Deep generative models for musical audio generation have witnessed great progress in recent years [1±8] . While models for generating symbolic music such as MIDI [9±12] or musical scores focus primarily on the composition of musical content, an audio-domain music generation model deals with sounds and thereby has extra complexities related to timbre and audio quality. For example, while a model for generating symbolic guitar tabs can simply consider a guitar tab as a sequence of notes , a model that generates audio recordings of guitar needs to determine not only the underlying sequence of notes but also the way to render (synthesize) the notes into sounds. Due to the complexities involved, research on deep generative models for musical audio begins with the simpler task of synthesizing individual musical notes [1±3], dispensing the need to consider the composition of notes. Follow-up research [4±6] extends the capability to generating musical passages of a single instrument. The Jukebox model proposed by OpenAI greatly advances the state-of-the-art by being able to, quoting their sentence, ªgenerate high-fidelity and diverse songs with coherence up to multiple minutes.º Being trained on a massive collection of audio recordings with the corresponding lyrics but not the symbolic transcriptions of music, Jukebox generates multi-instrument music as raw waveforms directly without an explicit model of the underlying sequence of notes.
This work aims to improve upon Jukebox in two aspects. First, the backbone of Jukebox is a hundred-layer Transformer [14, 15] with billions of parameters that are trained with 1.2 million songs on hundreds of NVIDIA V100 GPUs for weeks at OpenAI, which is hard to reproduce elsewhere. Inspired by a recent Jukebox-like model for singing voice generation called KaraSinger , we instead build a light-weight model with only 25 million parameters by working on Mel-spectrograms instead of raw waveforms. Our model is trained with only 457 recordings on a single GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU for 2 days.
Second, and more importantly, instead of a fully autonomous model that makes a song from scratch with various instruments, we aim to build a model that can work cooperatively with human, allowing the human partner to come up with the musical audio of some instruments as input to the model, and generating in return the musical audio of some other instruments to accompany and to complement the user input, completing the song together. Such a model can potentially contribute to human-AI co-creation in songwriting and enable new applications.
In technical terms, our work enhances the controllability of the model by allowing its generation to be steered on a user-provided audio track. It can be viewed as an interesting sequence-to-sequence problem where the model creates a ªtarget sequenceº of music that is to be played along to the input ªsource sequence.º Besides requirement on audio quality, the coordination between the source and target sequences in terms of musical aspects such as style, rhythm, and harmony is also of central importance.
We note that, for controllability and the intelligibility of the generated singing, both Jukebox and KaraSinger have a lyrics encoder that allows their generation to be steered on textual lyrics. While being technically similar, our accompaniment generation task (ªaudio-to-audioº) is different from the lyric-conditioned generation task (ªtextto-audioº) in that the latter does not need to deal with the coordination between two audio recordings.
Specifically, we consider a drum accompaniment generation problem in our implementation, using a ªdrumlessº recording as the input and generating as the output a drum track that involves the use of an entire drum kit. We use this as an example task to investigate the audio-domain accompaniment generation problem out of the following reasons. First, datasets used in musical source separation usually consist of an isolated drum stem along with stems corresponding to other instruments. We can therefore easily merge the other stems to create paired data of drumless tracks and drum tracks as training data of our model. (In musical terms, drumless, or ªMinus Drumsº songs are recordings where the drum part has been taken out, which corresponds nicely to our scenario.) Second, we suppose a drum accompaniment generation model can easily find applications in songwriting , as it allows a user (who may not be familiar with drum playing or beat making) to focus on the other non-drum tracks. Third, audio-domain drum accompaniment generation poses interesting challenges as the model needs to determine not only the drum patterns but also the drum sounds that are supposed to be, respectively, rhythmically and stylistically consistent with the input. Moreover, the generated drum track is expected to follow a steady tempo, which is a basic requirement for a human drummer. We call our model the ªJukeDrummer.º As depicted in Figure 1 , the proposed model architecture contains an ªaudio encoderº (instead of the original text encoder [7, 8] ) named the drumless VQ encoder that takes a drum-free audio as input. Besides, we experiment with different ways to capitalize an audio-domain beat and downbeat tracking model proposed recently in a novel beat-aware module that extracts beat-related information from the input audio, so that the language model for generation (i.e., the Transformer) is better informed of the rhythmic properties of the input. The specific model was trained on drumless recordings as well, befitting our task. We extract features from different levels, including lowlevel tracker embeddings, mid-level activation peaks, and high-level beat/downbeat positions, and investigate which one benefits the generation model the most.
Our contribution is four-fold. First, to our best knowledge, this work represents the first attempt to drum accompaniment generation of a full drum kit given drum-free mixed audio. Second, we develop a light-weight audio-toaudio Jukebox variant that takes an input audio of up to 24 seconds as conditioning and generates accompanying music in the domain of Mel-spectrograms (Section 3). Third, we experiment with different beat-related conditions in the context of audio generation (Section 4). Finally, we report objective and subjective evaluations demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed model (Sections 6 & 7). 1 . 1 We share our code and checkpoint at: legoodmanner/jukedrummer. Moreover, we provide audio examples at the following demo page: . github.io/jukedrummer-demo/ 2 ) that are not used at inference time.
The main architecture of Jukebox is composed of two components: a multi-scale vector-quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE) [37±41] and an autoregressive Transformer decoder [14, 15] . The VQ-VAE is for converting a continuous-valued raw audio waveform into a sequence of so-called discrete VQ codes, while the Transformer establishes a language model (LM) of the VQ codes capable of generating new code sequences. Specifically, VQ-VAE consists of an encoder and a decoder, referred to as the VQ-VAE encoder E and VQ-VAE decoder D below, respectively. Given an audio waveform x ∈ R 1×N , where N denotes the number of audio samples (e.g., N = 1,058,400 for a 24-second audio clip sampled at 44.1 kHz), the VQ-VAE encoder would convert x into a sequence of latent vectors {h t ∈ R D , t = 1, ..., T }, where the sequence length T is proportional to N , and the VQ-VAE decoder would have to reconstruct x from the ªvector-quantizedº version of the latent vectors, denoting as {h ′ t ∈ R D , t = 1, ..., T }, that is obtained by finding the nearest prototype vector h ′ t = e z of each h t in a codebook of prototype vectors {e k ∈ R D , k = 1, ..., K}, where K is the size of the codebook. Each prototype vector can be regarded as a cluster centroid in the latent space as a result of K-means clustering. The VQVAE encoder/decoder and the codebook are jointed learned by minimizing the reconstruction loss ∥x t -D(h ′ t )∥ 2 2 , and the commitment loss of the clustering ∥E(x t )sg(e z )∥ 2 2 , where x t denotes a slice of x, sg(.) the stop-gradient operation, and h t = E(x t ).
Once the VQ-VAE is trained, the x can be viewed as a sequence of ªIDsº {z t ∈ Z 1:K , t = 1, ..., T }, each corresponding to the index of the element of the codebook that is used to represent each slice of x. The Transformer can then be trained on such sequences of IDs to learn the underlying language, or ªcomposition rules,º of the audio codes. Once trained, the transformer can be used to generate a novel sequence of codes, which can then be converted into an audio waveform by the VQVAE decoder.
As the waveforms are extremely long, Jukebox actually uses a ªmulti-scaleº VQ-VAE that converts a waveform into three levels of codes, and accordingly three Transformers for building the LM at each level . KaraSinger works on Mel-spectrograms but also uses multi-scale VQ-VAE . We simplify their architecture by working on Mel-spectrograms with only one level of codes instead of multiple levels, as introduced below.
In our task, we are given pairs of audio waveforms, namely a drumless stem x m and a drum stem x d . Our goal is to train a model that can generate x d * given an unseen x m * from Mel VQ-VAE & Vocoder. To reduce computational cost, we build VQ-VAEs that take Mel-spectrograms as the input and target output. Specifically, we use the convolutional blocks of UNAGAN to build a pair of VQ-VAE encoder and VQ-VAE decoder that has symmetric architectures (one downsampling and the other upsampling). We omit the details of UNAGAN due to space limit. Our Transformer accordingly learns the LM for codes of the Mel-spectrograms. Once a novel sequence of (drum) codes is generated by the Transformer, we use our (drum) VQ-VAE decoder to convert the codes into a Mel-spectrogram, and then use a neural vocoder to convert the Melspectrogram into the corresponding waveform. While the latent vector h t (and accordingly z t ) corresponds to a slice of waveform in the original Jukebox, here the latent vectors h quence {z m t , t = 1, ..., T } corresponding to a drumless audio as the input, and a Transformer decoder to generate the sequence {z d t , t = 1, ..., T } corresponding to the accompanying drum audio as the output, leading to a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) architecture. Following Jukebox, we use the attention mechanism of the Scalable Transformer in our Transformer encoder/decoder. As depicted in Figure 3 , to determine its output z d i at each i, our Transformer decoder uses factorized ªin-chunk,º ªcross-chunkº and ªprevious-chunkº attention layers to attend to the drum codes it generates previously, namely z d <i = {z d t , t = 1, ..., i -1}, to maintain the coherence of its output. A ªchunkº here is a slice of the corresponding sequence. Moreover, the Transformer decoder uses ªencoder/decoder attentionº to attend to the final layer of the Transformer encoder to get contextual information from the drumless code sequence {z m t , t = 1, ..., T }. To better synchronize the input and output, position embeddings are used. We refer readers to [7, 15] for details.
Beat-Aware Module. Figure 3 also shows that we use a novel ªbeat-aware moduleº (after the position embedding) in both Transformer encoder and decoder. We note that the code z m t is trained to provide essential information needed to reconstruct the drumless audio x m t , so the information carried by z t might be mixed, covering different musical aspects including timbre, style, rhythm, etc. To supply the Transformer with clear rhythm-related information of x m , we might need such a dedicated beat-aware module.
As depicted in Figure 4 , the beat-aware module consists two sub-modules, the ªbeat information extractorº and the ªbeat conditioner.º The former extracts beat-related information per frame from x m using an existing beat/downbeat tracker , while the latter incorporates that beat-related information for each t as a beat condition embedding c m t ∈ R dmodel that has the same length d model as the token embedding of the Transformers, and adds together the beat condition embedding and token embedding per t to serve as the input to the subsequent attention layers.
Despite that deep learning-based beat/downbeat track-ers such as those proposed by Böck et al.
[43±45] have achieved excellent performance for mainstream pop, rock or dance music, their performance and behaviors are influenced by the sound source composition (i.e., drum/nondrum sounds) of their training data [19, 46] . Considering that our input music is drumless, which is quite different from the music that existing common beat/downbeat trackers [44, 45] are trained with and trained for, we use in our beat information extractor the ªnon-drum trackerº developed by Chiu et al. exclusively for drumless stems. In Section 4, we describe three ways to extract different levels of beat information feature from the non-drum tracker.
As shown on the left of Figure 4 , following the common design , the beat/downbeat tracker uses BLSTM layers to get 50-dimensional ªtracker embeddingsº from x m , and then uses fully-connected (FC) layers to compute 3-dimensional ªactivation functionsº indicating the likelihood of observing a beat, downbeat, or non-beat at each frame. Finally, either a simple peak-picking or a hidden Markov model (HMM)-based algorithm can be used to finalize the beat and downbeat time positions from the activation functions. We accordingly investigate extracting features from different stages of this processing pipeline.
Low-level (tracker) embeddings. We simply use the high-dimensional tracker embeddings, resampling it temporally, pooling them every L frames, and converting each of them to the desired length d model with an FC.
High-level beat/downbeat positions. From the beat and downbeat time positions estimated by HMM, a frame can be labeled as either a beat, downbeat, or non-beat. We learn three d model -dimensional embedding vectors corresponding to each case, and represent every L frames with one of the three vectors according to the frame labels.
Mid-level activation peaks. As the beat/downbeat positions are sparse over time, we consider a ªdenserº version by simply picking the peak positions of the activation func-tions by scipy.signal.find_peaks and similarly learning embedding vectors that are assigned to the frames according to whether a frame corresponds to a peak or not. Such a peak might represent a musical onset.
Multi-track datasets for research on musical source separation usually host recordings that each consists of an isolated drum stem along with stems corresponding to other instruments. We can simply take the drum stem as the target drum track, and the summation of the remaining stems as the input drumless track. In our implementation, we used the multi-track recordings from three datasets. MUSDB18 contains 150 recordings, each of which has four stems corresponding to vocal, drums, bass, and ªothers.º It is commonly used in source separation. Med-leyDB contains 196 multi-track recordings, each of which includes a drum stem along with many other stems. MixingSecret has 257 multi-track recordings with various instruments, all including drums. We removed the 46 duplicate recordings between MUSDB18 and MedleyDB and the 100 duplicate recordings between MUSDB18 and MixingSerect, leading to 457 recordings to be used in our work. We randomly split the recordings into 80%, 10%, 10% as the training set, validation set (for parameter tuning), and testing set (for objective and subjective evaluation) at the ªrecording-level,º ensuring that a recording does not appear in different splits.
All the recordings are sampled at 44.1 kHz and the stems are all monaural. Following Jukebox , we used 24-second audio clips in our work. We sliced each recording (and accordingly the stems) to 23.8-second audio clips with 50% temporal overlaps (as 2 20 /44100 = 23.8), and discarded the clips that do not contain any drum sounds. We then computed the Mel-spectrograms of each clip with PyTorch v1.7.1 with a Hann window of 1,024 samples for STFT, a hop size of 256 samples and 80 Mel-filter banks.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed JukeDrummer and validate the effectiveness of model components, we adopted the following variants in our experiments. 2 • seq2seq+beat (low): given a drumless clip x m , we computed the drumless codes {z m t } and the lowlevel beat/downbeat tracker embeddings {c m t } as the model input, to predict the drum codes {z d t } that eventually lead to the generated drum clip x d , using the proposed seq2seq Transformer. • seq2seq+beat (mid): using the beat condition embeddings computed from the mid-level activation peaks (see Section 4) for {c m t } instead. • seq2seq+beat (high): using the beat condition embeddings from the high-level beat/downbeat positions as {c m t } instead.
• seq2seq w/o beat: to study the usefulness of the beat conditioning, we predicted {z d t } from {z m t }, not using any beat-related conditions at all. • decoder+beat (low): to study the usefulness of the drumless codes {z m t }, we used only the lowlevel beat condition embeddings {c m t } as input to predict {z d t }, via a Transformer decoder-only architecture (i.e., not seq2seq Transformer).
• decoder w/o beat: this is the baseline drummer that ªplays its own,º generating {z d t } autoregressively via a Transformer decoder without taking any information (neither {z m t } nor {c m t }) from the drumless clip x m it is supposed to play along to. While the Mel-spectrogram for a clip in our case has 4,096 frames, the VQ-VAE encoder downsamples it to a sequence of T = 1,024 latent vectors, namely each corresponding to L = 4 frames. For VQ-VAE, we set the codebook size of drumless sounds K m = 1,024 and that of drums K d = 32 (so K m ≫ K d ), and the dimension of the latent vectors D = 64. The VQ-VAE encoders/decoders for both drumless and drums all have two layers. For those models employing a seq2seq LM, the Transformer encoder has 9 layers and the Transformer decoder has 20 layers. 3 At inference time, we used the drum VQ decoder to convert the drum codes {z d t } to a Mel-spectrogram, which is then turned into the waveform of the drum clip x d by a HiFi-GAN V1 vocoder . We trained the vocoder from scratch with audio of drum sounds from our dataset for 2.5 days, and then, inspired by [50, 51] , fine-tuned it on the reconstructed Mel-spectrograms of the Drum VQ decoder.
As audio-domain drum accompaniment generation is new, we propose customized metrics. Specifically, we use the ªdrum trackerº trained exclusively for drum stems by Chiu et al. , which follows exactly the same pipeline as the non-drum tracker (cf. Figure 4 ), to extract rhythmic features at three different levels for the ground-truth and generated drum sounds for the test split. We then compare the rhythmic features of the ground-truth and the generated in such three levels, using the mean square error for the low-level tracker embeddings (TrackEmb-MSE), cross entropy for the mid-level activation functions (Act-Entropy), and the F-measure for beat/downbeat estimation (B/DB-F1). The last one, computed by mir_eval , uses the beat positions of the ground-truth drums as the reference and those of the generated drums as the estimated beats. These metrics evaluates only the rhythmic consistency between the generated drums and the drumless audio (using its human-made drum track as a proxy), not other aspects such as stylistic consistency and audio quality, which will be evaluated subjectively in Section 7.
Subjective MOS (∈ [1, 5] ) Result shown in the middle of Table 1 clearly shows that the models with low-level beat information achieve lower MSE, cross entropy, and higher F1, suggesting the usefulness of the low-level beat information for rhythmic consistency. The mid-level and high-level ones seem less effective (possibly because they are relatively monotonic), so we did not evaluate them further in Section 7. The objective scores also suggest that the Transformer encoder does not contribute much to rhythmic consistency.
We have presented JukeDrummer, a novel audio-to-audio extension of OpenAI's JukeBox model capable of adding the drum part of a drumfree recording in the audio domain. To our knowledge, this represents the first attempt to audiodomain generation conditioned on drumless mixed audio. With objective and subjective evaluations, we validated the effectiveness of the customized VQ-VAE plus the seq2seq Transformer design, and the proposed beat-aware module. Among the beat conditions, we found that the low-level embeddings work the best. Future work can be done to further improve the language model (LM), and to extend our work to other audio-to-audio generation tasks.