Musical expression is the human touch that transforms a written piece of music into an emotionally moving experience. In musical interpretation and performance, the musician interprets a musical score and translates the intended expression through the control of the musical instrument, the sound of which conveys affect and emotion to the listener [1, 2] . However, effective control of musical instruments often requires considerable expertise and training, making musical expression less accessible than it could be.
Deep learning music performance models reduce the need for musical expertise and open up new ways to create and perform music [3, 4] . To render expressive performances of written music [5, 6] , the models mix recurrent neural networks to learn temporal dependencies in music with variational autoencoders to encode performance style and enable controllable generation . The models are trained on real and categorical score and performance features for aligned score and performance notes.
The related task of symbolic music generation is approached differently. Transformer models are primarily utilized due to their ability to effectively learn long-term dependencies in music sequences . The symbolic music is encoded as sequences of musical tokens, either individual [15, 18, 19] or stacked into tuples [16, 20] . Similar approaches could be applied to the task of rendering expressive music performances for written compositions.
Aiming to advance the research and make musical expression more accessible, we develop ScorePerformer foot_0 , a piano music performance rendering model with interactive fine-grained performance style control. The model combines encoder and decoder transformers with hierarchical maximum mean discrepancy variational autoencoders [21, 22] that encode performance style representations at the global, bar, beat, and onset levels.
To interpret the learned style embedding spaces, we train embedding classifiers that associate local performance contexts with written musical score direction markings. For each marking, we use the classifier predictions to compute the average delta vectors in the style space from negatively to positively classified style embeddings. These vectors provide quantified model control inputs to move the performance rendering per given direction marking.
For data encoding, we design a tokenized representation of score and performance music, a Score-Performance Music tuple (SPMuple). It introduces a local window onset tempo function that produces smoother and more robust tempos than inset-bar, -beat, or -onset tempo functions.
The experiments and evaluation results show that the model trained on the designed encoding successfully captures different performance styles, can sample diverse and coherent piano performances, and can be used for expressive performance rendering with fine-grained style control.
Our main contributions are:
1. We extend transformers for expressive piano performance rendering with hierarchical style encoding and control at the global, bar, beat, and onset levels;
2. We design a tokenized encoding for aligned score and performance music that proposes an efficient local tempo computation function;
3. We introduce performance direction classifiers to provide musical language-driven performance control by modifying the learned style latent spaces.
Expressive music performance rendering models require datasets of aligned score and performance music [5, 30] . In this work, we consider piano music performances in MIDI format and use the following data preparation pipeline. First, we compute alignments using Nakamura's alignment tool . The alignments may contain errors, such as alignment holes or close performance notes aligned with distant and unrelated score notes. Following the literature [8, 32] , we revise the alignments and filter out notes that deviate from the local performance tempo. After the cleanup, we omit performances with less than 80% aligned notes. Finally, to achieve a perfect match, we remove extra performed notes and interpolate missing notes using the local performance tempos and dynamics, since taking only matched notes and discarding score notes can result in the removal of important chord and bar information.
We introduce the Score-Performance Music tuple (SPMuple), a tokenized representation for aligned symbolic score and performance music. It encodes performed notes using tuples of 8 score and 4 performance tokens.
Score Tokens: a set of features extracted from the score MIDI. Pitch is a MIDI pitch number in the range 21 to 108. Duration is a score note value, encoded by 128 tokens with high and low resolution tokens for short and long durations, respectively [20, 33] . Bar is an index of the musical bar to which the note refers, ranging from 0 to the maximum bar in the data. Position is the position of the note in the bar, one of 128 tokens with 64th note resolution. TimeSignature is the time signature of the beat containing the note, a set of 22 tokens for 2nd, 4th, and 8th note beat lengths, with a maximum bar length of 2 whole notes for 2nd note, and 1.5 for 4th and 8th note. OnsetShift is the positional interval between the current and previous note onsets (chords). NotesInOnset and PositionInOnset are the number of notes and the index of the note in the onset, ranging from 1 to 12, notes are ordered by pitch.
Performance Tokens: a set of performance features extracted from the performance MIDI and processed using the aligned score note features. Velocity is a MIDI velocity from 1 to 127. Tempo is the performance tempo at the bar, beat or onset level, encoded by a geometric sequence of 121 tokens for beats per minute tempos from 15 to 480. RelOnsetDeviation models the exact timing of the note, encoded as the ratio of the absolute note-onset position deviation to the inter-onset interval scaled by the local onset tempo using 161 tokens for values in the range -2 to 2. RelPerformedDuration is an articulation of the performed note, computed as the ratio of the performed duration to the score duration, scaled by the local onset tempo, and encoded by 121 tokens for logarithmically distributed values between 0.1 and 3.
The score and performance token sequences are sorted by score note start position, pitch and duration.
Inset-onset tempos are noisy and have very high variance, while beat and bar tempos are smoother but still fluctuate at beat/bar boundaries, which can lead to degraded musical experience . We design a smooth alternative, local onset tempos, weighted with respect to previous onsets in the local onset time window.
Let {IOI s i } and {IOI p i } be the sets of score and performance inter-onset intervals between the onset o and N preceding onsets o i in the time window W . The weights w o i for inter-onset tempos
are computed as:
The weights give more attention to the closest preceding onsets, but still consider the more distant onsets to smooth the local tempo. Based on the decoding quality, we set the time window length W to 8s as the optimal one. In addition to the window W , we filter out the nearest onsets with IOI p i < 0.5 to reduce the effect of immediate tempo changes, and take at least N min = 8 past onsets with any IOI p to have enough points for smoothing (N ≥ N min ).
With a focus on hierarchical performance style control and efficient training on tokenized sequences, we present ScorePerformer, an encoder-decoder model that combines transformers and maximum mean discrepancy variational autoencoders (MMD-VAE) [21, 22] for controllable expressive rendering of piano performances for written scores. The model is illustrated in Figure 1 .
Score Encoder is an encoder transformer that computes a contextual representation of the written music. It maps a score note sequence y + ∈ N N ×10 (score tokens y + score tempos and velocities) to note embeddings c s ∈ R L×D .
Performance Encoder is an encoder transformer that computes performance style representations at different levels of the musical hierarchy. It takes a sequence of music tuples of score and performance tokens m = [y, x], y ∈ N N ×8 , x ∈ N N ×4 , and outputs performance context embeddings c p ∈ R N ×D . The embeddings are grouped and averaged over the entire sequence, bars, beats, and onsets, and iteratively passed through conditional linear layers to compute global, bar, beat, and onset latents z G , z B , z b , and z o . With the idea of learning missing lower-level details hierarchically, at each step t the latent z * t depends on the context c p t and all higher-level latents containing the note, e.g.
All note latents are stacked to produce note-level style embeddings z ∈ R N ×Dz .
The latent spaces are fit into the Gaussian distribution using a maximum mean discrepancy objective:
where
is a Gaussian kernel.
We use MMD-VAE [21, 22] to solve issues with posterior collapse and latent space holes common to conventional variational autoencoders , especially, when trained on sequential data .
Performance Decoder is a decoder transformer that renders performance by sequentially predicting performance tokens x t for score note tokens y t . The input token sequence combines two sequences: 1) a sequence m s = y with the current score notes to be rendered; 2) a sequence m -1 = [y -1 , x -1 ] shifted one step into the past score y -1 and rendered performance tokens x -1 describing the past performance history. To reuse the SPMuple token embedder, the first sequence is extended with the masked performance tokens. The two sequence embeddings are concatenated with the score context c s and passed to the transformer layers together with the style embeddings z.
We use style-adaptive layer normalization (SALN) and pass style embeddings z to the decoder's layer normalization layers, rather than concatenating the style and input token embeddings, to increase the focus on the performance style at each transformer layer.
The performance decoder minimizes the negative loglikelihood for the sequence of performance tokens x:
Discrete+Continuous Tokens: Discrete musical tokens do not explicitly encode the absolute and relative information about note attributes, e.g. that pitches C2, C3, and C4 differ by an octave, or that velocity 80 is louder than 60. We mix discrete and continuous tokens by summing learned discrete token embeddings with delta embeddings provided by a learned nonlinear mapping of the real values associated with tokens to the token embedding dimensions.
Relative Attention: We use the learned ALiBi relative positional bias in the decoder and the learned bidirectional symmetric bias in the encoder for efficient interpolation to sequence lengths not seen during training.
Other: We use single key-value attention heads to speed up decoding, SwiGLU activation [44, 45] in feedforward layers, reuse token embedding weights between the encoders and decoder since they share token vocabularies, and tie input and output embeddings in the decoder .
We provide an intuitive interpretation of the learned style embedding space by training performance direction classifiers on the learned note style embeddings. We extract performance direction markings from MusicXML files and associate score notes with performance direction labels where they are present. We train classifiers for dynamics (degrees of piano and forte), dynamic changes (crescendo and diminuendo), tempo (adagio, largo, etc.), tempo changes (accelerando, ritardando, etc.) and note articulation binary classes (staccato, fermata, etc.).
Classifiers take as input the combined note-level performance style embeddings z = [z G , z B , z b , z o ] and output the probabilities of directions being performed in a given performance context. The module minimizes the sum of cross entropy losses for K classifiers with C k classes each:
where d k t,c and dk t,c are true and predicted labels for direction c of the classifier k at step t.
Given the smoothness of the learned latent space, the differences between embeddings with high and low classification scores for a given marking may provide a direction in the latent space to move the generation toward the marking. We compute and use mean per-marking delta embeddings to control performance rendering. Since markings are related to defined musical concepts, we can map natural language commands, such as "play more piano here" or "switch to largo", to quantitative model control inputs.
The total loss minimized by the model during training is:
To avoid overfitting of the decoder to lower-level performance embeddings during training, we drop bar, beat, and onset embeddings with probabilities of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4, respectively. The embeddings are dropped inclusively, i.e. if the bar latent is dropped out, all beat and onset latents are also dropped. Additionally, the classifiers are trained on detached style embeddings z, as we found the model to overfit the unbalanced direction markings labels.
During inference, the sampled or modified reference performance embeddings can be used to control the rendering of the music performance. Based on the learned style spaces, the control can range from high-level global to lowlevel onset. The extracted performance direction delta embeddings can be used to provide intuitive, command-driven performance manipulation. The model supports real-time inference on the CPU for use in interactive applications.
Datasets: For all experiments, we use the ASAP dataset of matched piano scores and performances , preprocessed as described in Section 3.1. The prepared dataset represents 212 musical compositions by 15 composers with a total of 937 performances, 79 hours of performed music. The data is divided into training and evaluation sets with an approximate ratio of 9:1 for the number of performances in the entire dataset and for each composer.
Implementation: The SPMuple data encoding is implemented using miditok's MIDI tokenizer interface. The encoders and decoders in all experiments have a hidden dimension of 256, 4 layers, and 4 attention heads, except for the score encoder, which has 2 layers. The token embedding dimension is set to 128 for each token type, the projected embedding dimension for input embeddings is set to 256. The global, bar, beat, and onset latent dimensions are set to 32, 20, 8, and 4, respectively.
Training: The maximum sequence length during training is set to 256 tokens. To regularize the model and artificially increase the variety of data, we augment the data with sampled pitch shifts (up to ±3 semitones) and velocity shifts (up to ±12 MIDI values). In addition, we randomly replace real performances with deadpan performances with a probability of 25% to allow the model to learn the style of both expressive and inexpressive music. We use the ADAM optimizer with an initial learning rate of 2 • 10 -4 , decaying by 0.995 after each epoch. Models are trained for 70,000 iterations with batch size 128.
Evaluation: We conduct three sets of experiments: 1) evaluation of the designed data encoding and different local tempo calculation functions; 2) comparison of different latent style hierarchies and their impact on performance rendering; 3) an ablation study on the model architecture design. For the metrics, we use Pearson correlation [9, 11, 48] and mean absolute error for performance features: inter-onset intervals (IOI), absolute onset deviations (OD), performed note durations (PD), and velocity (Vel). We generate 3 samples for each performance in the evaluation set and compute and average the metrics between the ground truth and the generated performances, decoded to MIDI. The errors are measured in seconds, except for velocities, which are measured in MIDI velocity values. After the objective evaluation, we analyze the generation and control capabilities of the designed ScorePerformer model.
The tokenized representation of performance is not lossless, since some information is lost during feature quantization. We evaluate the decoding quality and performance of ScorePerformer on sequences encoded using SPMuple with different local tempo functions.
Table 1 shows the evaluation results. The local window onset tempo function (Section 3.3) shows the least degradation in decoding quality for inter-onset intervals and onset deviations. timing more efficiently than bar, beat and onset tempos. These findings are supported by the generation results. The model trained with local window tempo tokens renders samples with smaller errors and closer to the ground truth than the models trained with bar, beat, or onset tempo tokens. In particular, it shows more consistency in modeling local tempo changes and note timing. For future work, the encoding could be further improved by incorporating pedals, an essential element of piano performance .
Table 2 shows the impact of different learned style embedding hierarchy combinations in ScorePerformer on the quality of performance rendering. Replacing lower-level latents with higher-level ones, using only a single level, or omitting any level of the hierarchy leads to a decrease in quality for all musical features. The lower-level onset latents account for most of the variation in performance features, while the higher-level latents provide the missing performance timing, articulation, and dynamics information at the beat, bar, and global levels. The results suggest that a hierarchical style representation is advantageous for modeling global and local changes in music performance. The search for an optimal configuration of latent dimensions is beyond the scope of this study. 3 . Evaluation of model configurations using the correlation between ground truth and generated performances.
We explore the learned performance style spaces using the trained performance direction marking classifiers. We take the style embeddings z for note onsets in the dataset and project them into two dimensions using principal component analysis . Figure 3 shows the projected embeddings labeled by the selected dynamics, tempo, and articulation markings classifiers and their ground truth labels. We can see the gradient moving from the light colors (high probabilities) to the darker colors (low probabilities). Despite the class imbalances and low representation of some labels in the dataset, the positive classifier predictions match the areas of the ground truth labels shown in the right plots for each marking. This suggests that the vectors for moving the performance toward the markings exist in the original latent style space and can be used to attempt to control the performance rendering through the model. The direction classifiers can also be used to analyze performance practices. For example, take all performance contexts with a given notated performance direction marking and sort them by the classification scores using the associated direction classifier. Further analysis of the score contexts can provide insight into the reasons why musicians follow or interpret differently certain markings.
For performance rendering control, we add control embeddings ∆z to the encoded style embeddings and pass them to the decoder. We analyze both uncontrolled generation with sampled control embeddings and direction-based control using the computed delta latents for markings.
Figure 2 shows examples of music performance rendering for a composition from the evaluation set. The sample (a) shows the successful reconstruction of the performance variations from the encoded style embeddings. When generated using sampled delta latents (b), the added noise is transferred to higher variations in tempo than in articulation and dynamics. In our observations, small amounts of delta noise can result in both pleasant and diverse samples.
From the evaluation of the performance direction based control, we can see that in most cases the model follows the musical meaning of the marking. Example (c) shows that piano and forte delta embeddings lead to the expected decrease and increase in dynamics. The più mosso (more movement, faster) and largo (slowly and broadly) in the example (d) lead to the expected changes in tempo, articulation and dynamics. An interesting behaviour can be found in example (e), where the model values one marking over the other. During the alternation of crescendo and diminuendo, the model follows diminuendo more and falls on the path of slow and quiet performance. The last example (f) shows that the control can also be applied effectively to individual notes. As the definitions suggest, the staccato on higher pitched notes makes them more abrupt, and the fermata on other notes holds the notes a bit longer.
Despite the positive examples of piano performance rendering control, the model has some limitations. The proposed marking delta embeddings encode the highest learned deviations between performance styles and lead to immediate changes in performance, which can sound unnatural. One solution is to scale or interpolate the control inputs for smoother performance changes. Another issue to be addressed is disentangling the learned latent space across direction classes for a more controllable generation. Finally, the study was limited by low performance variation for some markings and compositions in the dataset. We believe that the proposed approach has a high potential for both analytical and musical creativity applications that could be fulfilled with orders of magnitude larger datasets.
We presented ScorePerformer, an encoder-decoder transformer with hierarchical MMD-VAE style encoding heads for fine-grained controllable expressive rendering of piano music performances. We also introduced performance direction classifiers, trained on performance style embeddings, to map notated direction markings and natural language inputs to model control inputs. Evaluation showed that the model captures performance style variations and follows control intents. Future work will focus on improving the diversity of training data to enable large-scale analysis, and may include in-depth subjective evaluation of the proposed and existing performance rendering models.