Deep music representation learning have been proven to be a powerful tool for high-quality symbolic music generation . The learned representations can be directly fed into downstream predictive models such as LSTMs and Transformers to achieve more coherent results than note-based or event-based generation Furthermore, when a representation learning model has a probability interpretation, the representation can then be easily interpolated or resampled to create new music pieces. Recently, several studies further disentangle music representations into interpretable factors (such as pitch, rhythm, chord and texture) to achieve a more controllable and interactive music generation [5, 7, 8] . For example, we can keep the pitch factor of a melody while resampling its rhythm factor to achieve theme variation. We can also interpolate the pitch factor for a smooth music morphing .
Despite the above mentioned progress , most existing work applies only to short music segments with a length of several beats, while learning long-term representations remains a challenging task. In particular, studies have shown that even for monophonic melodies, "flat" model designs (e.g., using long-range sequential encoders) have difficulty remembering a complete music phrase at once. Some other studies have attempted to solve this problem by building another layer of hierarchy on top of short-range flat models, learning short-term and longterm representations simultaneously in an end-to-end manner [1, 12] . However, as the model expressivity increases with the number of layers, models also become much more difficult to train.
We argue that the main problem with current methods is the lack of proper inductive bias, and in this paper we propose a new method for learning long-term, phrase-level symbolic music representations through contextual constraints. The method consists of two stages pre-training and fine-tuning, with two steps in each stage. In the pretraining stage, we first adopt EC 2 -VAE to learn barlevel, disentangled latent pitch and rhythm representations. Then, we apply the same model to learn phrase-level representation but with contrastive losses to constrain the difference between phrase-level and bar-level representations. It is indeed difficult to learn phrase-level representations directly using bar-level models, but the additional contrastive constraint can serve as a useful inductive bias to help find a reasonable solution that can subsequently be improved by fine-tuning. During the fine-tuning stage, we replace the pre-trained decoder with a hierarchical prediction model that forces the phrase-level representation to reconstruct the bar-level ones. This is achieved by first tuning only the new hierarchical decoder (while fixing the pre-trained encoder) and then tuning the whole network. During these two steps, structured contrastive loss is applied to stabilize the learning process.
Experiments show that the proposed method significantly outperforms the baselines and successfully learns disentangled pitch and rhythm representations for 8-bar long phrases (32 beats in 4/4 meter) without increasing the latent dimensionality. To our knowledge, this is also the first generative model that achieves phrase-level composition style transfer, latent factor interpolation, and theme variation. In sum, our contributions are as follows:
• We demonstrate the importance of structured contextual constraints in learning long-term disentangled representations. Our approach only requires reasonable amount of data to train and could learn compact latent representation. • We show that the proposed Structured InfoNCE loss effectively expresses the contextual constraints, stabilizes the training of long-range models and helps the model converge faster. • Our model achieves phrase-level music style transfer, latent factor interpolation, and theme variation.
Contrastive learning (CL) is an efficient method in selfsupervised learning , serving as regularization to latent representations. For example, NCE-based contrastive losses [16, 17] have been widely used and achieved good results in natural language processing. Contrastive predictive coding (CPC) and Deep Infomax (DIM) explore the relation between minimizing a contrastive learning loss and maximizing a lower bound of the mutual information. In DIM, global feature is connected with local feature to learn more abstract and informative representations.
The hierarchical nature of music has been studied for a long time . Recently, we see some efforts on learning long-term music representations using hierarchical modeling [12, 24, 25] . The basic idea is that since a flat model design can only effectively learn shot-term representations, we can stack more layers on top of the shortterm representations module for long-term representations.
Existing works include MusicVAE , Music Transformer VAE , Jukebox , etc. However, experiments show that unless we have a huge amount of data, the model is in general very difficult to train. In this study, we provide a two-stage algorithm with contrastive loss as a better learning strategy. Also, no model so far has achieved disentanglement for long-term representation as done in this study.
In this section, we introduce our algorithm in detail. Conceptually, it consists of two stages, each with two steps.The first stage is pre-training:
• In step 1, we simply adopt EC 2 -VAE , an existing music representation disentanglement model, to extract short-term pitch and rhythm representations.
• In step 2, we build Long-EC 2 -VAE, a long-term version of the model and train it with an extra contextual constraint using the proposed Structured InfoNCE loss. Intuitively, this loss prevents the learned longterm representations from deviating too far from corresponding well-trained short-term representations.
The second stage is fine-tuning, in which we build a hierarchical representation-learning model by combining the encoder of Long-EC 2 -VAE with a hierarchical decoder. We name this model after Hierarchical-EC 2 -VAE.
• In step 1, we only train the hierarchical decoder to ensure the predictive power of the long-term representation. • In step 2, we train the whole hierarchical network for a better long-term pitch-rhythm disentanglement. ure 1, the right-hand-side part is a literal copy of the EC 2 -VAE encoder (with parameters fixed) to extract short-term representations, while the left-hand-side part is a simple adaptation of EC 2 -VAE for long-term music by lengthening its temporal receptive field. Note that the left part alone is not able to learn long-term representations, and our goal is to assist it using contrastive learning. Formally, the loss function of Long-EC 2 -VAE is:
where L Long-EC
where z L,f and W are the normalized long-term representations and weighing matrix we need to learn. f = {p, r} indicates whether it is the pitch or rhythm factor. Likewise, we use ẑS,f to denote the short-term representations extracted by right-hand-side model. K and τ are hyperparameters. K is the amount negative samples and τ is the temperature parameter.
In specific, the short-term melodies are half as long as long-term ones. The positive samples ẑ+ S,f are in the cases that the corresponding short-term melody is a part of the long-term melody and f takes the same value as in z L,f , while the negative samples are not in this case. Also, the long-term and short-term representations share the same dimensionality. In the first step of training (Figure 2 (a)), the encoder is a literal copy from the Long-EC 2 -VAE model and we only train the hierarchical decoder. Formally, the loss function is:
where the first term refers to the reconstruction losses adopted from the EC 2 -VAE model, and the second term is defined as:
where z l,f are the normalized hierarchical representations we need to learn with l = {intermediate, bar} indicating the level of representation and other notations follow the Proceedings of the 22nd ISMIR Conference, Online, November 7-12, 2021 same meaning as in Eq.( 2 ). Here, both positive ẑ+ l,f and negative ẑl,f samples are normalized representations computed from a pre-trained EC 2 -VAE, in which the positive samples are in the cases that the ẑ+ l,f and z l,f are computed based on the same music segment and have the same value of l and f , while ẑl,f are not in this case. After the first step achieves a reasonable accuracy, we proceed to step 2 (Figure 2(b) ), unfreezing the encoder and training the whole hierarchical representation-learning model with:
where the first two terms are defined in Eq. ( 3 ) and Eq. ( 2 ) respectively. L KL phrase is KL divergence to only regularize the phrase-level representations by a normal distribution. The value β controls the degree of KL divergence penalty.
We train our model on Nottingham Database and POP909 database .
Our dataset contains 2154 melodies (at song level) in total. We randomly split these pieces into 2 subsets: 90% songs for training and 10% songs for test. The data format is designed as the same as in in which 4 bar or 8 bar melodies are formalized as sequences of 130-dimensional one-hot embedding vectors and 16-beat and 32-beat rhythm pattern is represented by a sequence of 3-dimensional one-hot embedding vectors. Each vector in the melody sequence denotes a 1 4 -beat unit. The first 128 dimensions of this vector denote 128 MIDI-format pitches from 0 to 127, the 129 th dimension is the holding state for longer note duration, and the last dimension is kept for rest. The three dimensions of rhythm pattern vectors represent the onset of any pitch, a holding state, and rest, respectively.
All of our models are trained using Adam optimizer with a scheduled learning rate from 1e-3 to 1e-5. The batch size is 128 in the pre-training stage and is 64 in the finetuning stage. We do normalization on representations in Eq.( 2 ) and ( 4 ) to make the training process more stable. The representations fed into decoders are original representation without normalization.
In the pre-training stage, we simply adopt the structure of EC 2 -VAE to model 4 bar and 8 bar EC 2 -VAE. Each model comprises an encoder with a bi-directional GRU layer, a rhythm decoder with a GRU layer, and a global decoder with a GRU layer. We set the hidden dimension of the GRU in the encoder and decoders to 2048. The latent dimension is 128 for disentangled pitch representations and 128 for disentangled rhythm representations for each range model. For L Structured InfoNCE depicted in Eq. ( 2 ), we set K to 512 and τ to 1. The positive samples for Eq. ( 2 ) and Eq. ( 4 ) are the representations of 1-4th, 3-6th and 5-8th bar from well-trained 4 bar EC 2 -VAE. Actually, even when training the 4-bar EC 2 -VAE (right-hand side of Figure 1 ), we use a similar constrastive loss as in Eq. ( 2 ) where the positive samples are representations of 1-2th, 2-3th, 3-4th bar from well-trained 2 bar (original) EC 2 -VAE .
Hierarchical-EC 2 -VAE model consists of a long-term (8 bar) EC 2 -VAE encoder, 4 GRU layers, and an aggregation of 2 bar EC 2 -VAE decoders. We first train the hierarchical model with fixed 8 bar EC 2 -VAE encoder from pre-trained stage for around 25 epochs. Then we train the whole model without fixing parameters. We set the hidden dimension of 4 GRU layers to 1024. We set K to 256 and τ to 1 for both Structured InfoNCE loss and InfoNCE loss and set β to 0.1 in Eq. ( 5 ).
We objectively evaluate the model in terms of reconstruction accuracy, training stability, and disentanglement.
Table 1 shows that the reconstruction accuracy of the proposed models (2nd an 3rd rows) significantly outperform the baseline, a vanilla EC 2 -VAE applied to 8-bar melody (first row). The last two rows show the results of two ablation settings of Hierarchical-EC 2 -VAE: one without the contrastive loss and the other without first fixing the parameters of encoder and directly train the model end-toend. We see that the proposed Structured InfoNCE or In-foNCE losses play a vital role for an accurate reconstruction and the two-step training strategy improves the result marginally.
Recon Comparing the accuracy curves of the proposed Long-EC 2 -VAE with the baseline as illustrated in Figure 3 , we find that the proposed Long-EC 2 -VAE converges more quickly during training. This indicates that the proposed training strategy leads to a better initialization and makes the performance of the model fluctuate less during training.
We evaluate the disentanglement performance of models using a disentanglement evaluation method adopted in and . The method randomly transposes all the notes of the input data by i(i ∈ [1, 12] ) semitones while keeping the rhythm and underlying chord unchanged and then measures the variation of disentangled representations.We denote Σ|∆z p | and Σ|∆z r | as the variation of z p and z r . As shown in Figure 4 , values of Σ|∆z p | of the proposed Hierarchical-EC 2 -VAE are relatively high while Σ|∆z r | maintains in a significantly low level. This indicates that the pitch and rhythm representations of the proposed Hierarchical-EC 2 -VAE are well-disentangled as the change of notes has a tiny impact on z r . Similarly, we can intuitively find in the figure that the disentanglement performance of the proposed Hierarchical-EC 2 -VAE is much better than the baseline and also outperforms the proposed Long-EC 2 -VAE.
In this section, we show some music generation results by manipulating the disentangled phrase-level pitch and rhythm representations in three different ways: style transfer via swapping the representation, rhythm morphing via interpolating the representation, and theme variation via representation posterior sampling.
We cross-swap the disentangled pitch and rhythm factors z p and z r of two 8-bar melodies A and B and then obtain generative pieces C and D. The results are shown in Figure 5 , in which we see that both of the two generative pieces perfectly inherit target rhythm patterns. Besides, these generative melodies vary slightly from the source melody and these variations tend to sound creative, i.e. the appearance of embellished notes.
We interpolate rhythm representations z r of two phrases using SLERP while keeping the pitch and chord unchanged. The interpolated latent representations can then be "re-synthesized" using Hierarchical-EC 2 -VAE.
As shown in Figure 6 , we interpolate z r of the piece A and B with different SLERP weights. The results exhibit a surprising sense of coherence of pitch and rhythm in generative melodies, even in the transition between consecutive bars.This implies that a longer-term representation is also adept at modeling short-term generation and even contains more global harmonic information than a short-term representation.
We can also achieve theme variation by adding a Gaussian noise to z r while keeping z p unchanged . As a sample shown in Figure 7 , we find that as the variance of the noise grows larger, the pitch and rhythm of the generative melody are still reasonable smooth, implying that the longterm representations contain the coherence of contextual information and can "control" the generation process.
In our survey, each subject is given 5 groups of pieces. Each group contains three 8 bar pieces: a human-composed piece from Nottingham dataset and 2 theme variations generated by a 2-bar EC 2 -VAE and Hierarchical-EC 2 -VAE, respectively. In each group, the generated pieces use z p of the human-composed piece and the sampled z r .
Each subject listens to five randomly arranged groups in turn and is required to rate each melody ranging from 1 (very low) to 5 (very high) according to three aspects: creativity, naturalness (how human-like the composition is) and overall musicality.
In conclusion, we contribute a pipeline of algorithms to learn long-term and disentangled music representations. The main novelty lies in the proposed two inductive biases which constrain the long-term representations using contextual information. The first one requires long-term representation to be not too different from the short-term ones which represent a part of the long-term sequence, and we demonstrate contrastive loss is well-suited for such rough constraint. The second inductive bias is that a good longterm representation should be able to reconstruct the corresponding short-term ones, and we use a hierarchical predictive model to realize this constraint. Unlike most hierarchical models, our purpose is not prediction for its own sake, but rather to leverage the prediction power to learn a well-disentangled long-term representation. Experimental results show that our approach is quite successful, capable of disentangling pitch and rhythmic factors for phraselevel (32 beats) melody without increasing the dimensionality of latent representation compared to bar-level models. Moreover, the learned representations enable high-quality phrase-level style transfer via representation swapping and theme variation by representation interpolation and posterior sampling.