Deep generative models do not just allow us to generate new data, but also to change properties of existing data in principled ways, and even transfer properties between data samples. Have you ever wanted to be able to create paintings like Van Gogh or Monet? No problem! Just take a picture with your phone, run it through a neural network, and out comes your personal masterpiece. Being able to generate new data samples and perform style transfer requires models to obtain a deep understanding of the data. Thus, advancing the state-of-the-art in deep generative models and neural style transfer is not just important for transforming horses into zebras, 1 but lies at the very core of Deep (Representation) Learning research .
While neural style transfer has produced astonishing results especially in the visual domain [21, 37] , the progress for sequential data, and in particular music, has been slower. We can already transfer sentiment between restaurant reviews [30, 36] , or even change the instrument with which a melody is played , but we have no way of knowing how our favorite pop song would have sounded if it were written by a composer who lived in the classical epoch or how a group of jazz musicians would play the Overture of Mozart's Don Giovanni. In this work we take a step towards this ambitious goal. To the best of our knowledge, this paper presents the first successful application of unaligned style transfer to musical compositions. Our proposed model architecture consists of parallel Variational Autoencoders (VAE) with a shared latent space and an additional style classifier. The style classifier forces the model to encode style information in the shared latent space, which then allows us to manipulate existing songs, and effectively change their style, e.g., from Classic to Jazz. Our model is capable of producing harmonic polyphonic music with multiple instruments. It also learns the dynamics of music by incorporating note durations and velocities.
Our model is based on the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) and operates on a symbolic music representation that is extracted from MIDI files. We extend the standard piano roll representation of note pitches with velocity and instrument rolls, modeling the most important information contained in MIDI files. Thus, we term our model MIDI-VAE. MIDI-VAE uses separate recurrent encoder/decoder pairs that share a latent space. A style classifier is attached to parts of the latent space to make sure the encoder learns a compact latent style label that we can then use to perform style transfer. The architecture of MIDI-VAE is shown in Figure 1 , and will be explained in more detail in the following.
We use music files in the MIDI format, which is a symbolic representation of music that resembles sheet music. MIDI files have multiple tracks. Tracks can either be on with a certain pitch and velocity, held over multiple time steps or be silent. Additionally, an instrument is assigned to each track. To feed the note pitches into the model we represent them as a tensor P ∈ {0, 1} nP •nB •nT (commonly known as piano roll and henceforth referred to as pitch roll), where n P is the number of possible pitch values, n B is the number of beats and n T is the number of tracks. Thus, each song in the dataset is split into pieces of length n B . We choose n B such that each piece corresponds to one bar. We include a "silent" note pitch to indicate when no note is played at a time step. The note velocities are encoded as tensor V ∈ [0, 1] nP •nB •nT (velocity roll). Velocity values between 0.5 and 1 signify a note being played for the first time, whereas a value below 0.5 means that either no note is being played, or that the note from the last time step is being held. The note velocity range defined by MIDI (0 to 127) is mapped to the interval [0.5, 1]. We model the assignment of instruments to tracks as matrix I = {0, 1} nT •nI (instrument roll), where n I is the number of possible instruments. The instrument assignment is a global property and thus remains constant over the duration of one song. Finally, each song in our dataset belongs to a certain style, designated by the style label S ∈ {Classic, Jazz, P op, Bach, M ozart}.
In order to generate harmonic polyphonic music it is important to model the joint probability of simultane- ously played notes. A standard recurrent neural network model already models the joint distribution of the sequence through time. If there are multiple outputs to be produced per time step, a common approach is to sample each output independently. In the case of polyphonic music, this can lead to dissonant and generally "wrong" sounding note combinations. However, by unrolling the piano rolls in time we can let the RNN learn the joint distribution of simultaneous notes as well. Basically, instead of one n T -hot vector for each beat, we input n T 1-hot vectors per beat to the RNN. This is a simple but effective way of modeling the joint distribution of notes. The drawback is that the RNN needs to model longer sequences. We use the pretty midi Python library to extract information from MIDI files and convert them to piano rolls.
MIDI-VAE is based on the standard VAE with a hyperparameter β to weigh the Kullback-Leibler divergence in the loss function (as in ). A VAE consists of an encoder q θ (z|x), a decoder p φ (x|z) and a latent variable z, where q and p are usually implemented as neural networks parameterized by θ and φ. In addition to minimizing the standard autoencoder reconstruction loss, VAEs also impose a prior distribution p(z) on the latent variables. Having a known prior distribution enables generation of new latent vectors by sampling from that distribution. Furthermore, the model will only "use" a new dimension, i.e., deviate from the prior distribution, if it significantly lowers the reconstruction error. This encourages disentanglement of latent dimensions and helps learning a compact hidden representation. The VAE loss function is
where the first term corresponds to the reconstruction loss, and the second term forces the distribution of latent variables to be close to a chosen prior. D KL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence, which gives a measure of how similar two probability distributions are. As is common practice, we use an isotropic Gaussian distribution with unit variance as our prior, i.e., p(z) = N (0, I). Thus, both q θ (z|x)
and p(z) are (isotropic) Gaussian distributions and the KL divergence can be computed in closed form.
As described in Section 3.1, we represent multi-track music as a combination of note pitches, note velocities and an assignment of instruments to tracks. In order to generate harmonic multi-track music, we need to model a joint distribution of these input features instead of three marginal distributions. Thus, our model consists of three encoder/decoder pairs with a shared latent space that captures the joint distribution. For each input sample (i.e., a piece of length n B beats), the pitch, velocity and instrument rolls are passed through their respective encoders, implemented as RNNs. The output of the three encoders is concatenated and passed through several fully connected layers, which then predict σ z and µ z , the parameters of the approximate posterior q θ (z|x) = N (µ z , σ z ). 2 Using the reparameterization trick , a latent vector z is sampled from this distribution as z ∼ N (µ z , σ z * ) where * stands for element-wise multiplication. This is necessary because it is generally not possible to backpropagate gradients through a random sampling operation, since it is not differentiable. is sampled from an isotropic Gaussian distribution N (0, σ * I), where we treat σ as a hyperparameter (see Section 4.2 for more details). This shared latent vector is then fed into three parallel fully connected layers, from which the three decoders try to reconstruct the pitch, velocity and instrument rolls. The note pitch and instrument decoders are trained with cross entropy losses, whereas for the velocity decoder we use MSE.
Having a disentangled latent space might enable some control over the style of a song. If for example one dimension in the latent space encodes the dynamics of the music, then we could easily change an existing piece by only varying this dimension. Choosing a high value for β (the weight of the KL term in the VAE loss function) has been shown to increase disentanglement of the latent space in the visual domain on the reconstruction performance. Therefore, we introduce additional structure into the latent space by attaching a softmax style classifier to the top k dimensions of the latent space (z style ), where k equals the number of different styles in our dataset. This forces the encoder to write a "latent style label" into the latent space. Using only k dimensions and a weak classifier encourages the encoder to learn a compact encoding of the style. In order to change a song's style from S i to S j , we pass the song through the encoder to get z, swap the values of dimensions z i style and z j style , and pass the modified latent vector through the decoder. As style we choose the music genre (e.g., Jazz, Pop or Classic) or individual composers (Bach or Mozart).
Putting all parts together, we get the full loss function of our model as
In this section we describe our dataset and pre-processing steps. We also give some insight into the training of our model and justification for hyperparameter choices.
Our dataset contains songs from the genres Classic, Jazz and Pop. The songs were gathered from various online sources; 3 a summary of the properties is shown in Table 1 . Note that we excluded symphonies from our Classic, Bach and Mozart datasets due to their complexity and high number of simultaneously playing instruments. We use a train/test split of 90/ We exclude drum tracks, since they do not have a pitch value. We choose the 16 th note as smallest unit. In the most widely used time signature 4 4 there are 16 16 th notes in a bar. 91% of Jazz and Pop songs in our dataset are in 4 4 , whereas for Classic the fraction is 34%. For songs with time signatures other than 4 4 we still designate 16 16th notes as one bar. All songs are split into samples of one bar and our model auto-encodes one sample at a time. During training we shuffle the songs for each epoch, but keep the bars of a song in the correct order and do not reset the RNN states between samples. Thus, our model is trained on a proper sequence of bars, instead of being confused by random bar progressions.
There are 128 possible pitches in MIDI. Since very low and high pitches are rare and often do not sound pleasing, we only use n P = 60 pitch values ranging from 24 (C 1 ) to 84 (C 6 ).
Our model is generally not sensitive to most hyperparameters. Nevertheless we continuously performed local hyperparameter searches based on good baseline models, only varying one hyperparameter at a time. We use the reconstruction accuracy of the pitch roll decoder as evaluation metric. Using Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) instead of LSTMs increases performance significantly. Using bidirectional GRUs did not improve the results. The pitch roll encoder/decoder uses two GRU layers, whereas the rest uses only one layer. All GRU state sizes as well as the size of the latent space z are set to 256. We use the ADAM optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.0002. For most layers in our architecture, we found tanh to work better than sigmoid or rectified linear units. We train on batches of size 256. The loss function weights λ P , λ I , λ V and λ S were set to 1.0, 1.0, 0.1 and 0.1 respectively. λ p was set to 1.0 to favor high quality note pitch reconstructions over the rest. λ V was also set to 1.0 because the MSE magnitude is much smaller than the cross entropy loss values.
During our experiments, we realized that high values of β generally lead to very poor performance. We further found that setting the variance of to the value of σ = 1, as done in all previous work using VAEs, also has a negative effect. Therefore we decided to treat σ as a hyperparameter as well. Figure 2 shows the results of the grid search. σ is the variance of the distribution from which the values for the reparameterization trick are sampled, and is thus usually set to the same value as the variance of the prior. However, especially at the beginning of learning, this introduces a lot of noise that the decoder needs to handle, since the values for µ z and σ z , output by the encoder, are small compared to . We found that by reducing σ , we can improve the performance of our model significantly, while being able to use higher values for β. An annealing strategy for both β and σ might produce better results, but we did not test this. In the final models we use β = 0.1 and σ = 0.01. Note that during generation we sample z from N (0, σ ẑ ), where σ ẑ is the empirical variance obtained by feeding the entire training dataset through the encoder. The empirical mean µ ẑ is very close to zero.
All models are trained on single GPUs (GTX 1080) until the pitch roll decoder converges. This corresponds to around 400 epochs, or 48 hours. We train one model for each genre/composer pair to make learning easier. This results in four models that we henceforth call CvJ (trained on Classic and Jazz), CvP (Classic and Pop), JvP (Jazz and Pop) and BvM (Bach and Mozart). The train/test accuracies/losses of all final models are shown in Table 2 . The columns correspond to the terms in our model's full loss function (Equation 1 ).
In this section we evaluate the capabilities of MIDI-VAE. Wherever mentioned, corresponding audio samples can be found on YouTube. 4
To evaluate the effectiveness of MIDI-VAE's style transfer, we train three separate style evaluation classifiers. The input features are the pitch, velocity and instrument rolls re- spectively. The three style classifiers are also combined to output a voting based ensemble prediction. The accuracy of the classifiers is computed as the fraction of correctly predicted styles per bar in a song. We predict the likelihood of the source style before and after the style change. If the style transfer works, the predicted likelihood of the source style decreases. The larger the difference, the stronger the effect of the style transfer. Note that for all experiments presented in this paper we set the number of styles k = 2, that is, one MIDI-VAE model is trained on two styles, e.g., Classic vs. Jazz. Therefore, the style classifier is binary and a reduction in probability of the source style is equivalent to an increase in probability of the target style of the same magnitude. All style classifiers use two-layer GRUs with a state size of 256. Table 3 shows the performance of MIDI-VAE's style transfer when measured by the ensemble style classifier. We trained a separate MIDI-VAE for each style pair. For each pair of styles we perform a style change on all songs in both directions and average the results. The style transfer works for all models, albeit to varying degrees. In all cases except for JvP, the predictor is even skewed below 0.5, meaning that the target style is now considered more likely than the source style.
Table 4 shows the style transfer results measured by each individual style classifier. We can see that pitch and velocity contribute equally to the style change, whereas instrumentation seems to correlate most with the style. For CvJ and CvP, switching the style heavily changes the instrumentation. Figure 3 illustrates how the instruments of all songs in our Jazz test set are changed when switching the style to Classic. Only few instruments are rarely changed (piano, ensemble, reed), whereas most others are mapped to one or multiple different instruments. The instrument switch between genres with highly overlapping instrumentation (JvP, BvM) is much less pronounced. Classifying style based on the note pitches and velocities of one bar is more difficult, as shown by the "before" accuracies in Table 4 , which are generally lower than the ones of the instrument roll based classifier. Nevertheless, the style transfer changes pitch and velocity towards the target style. MIDI-VAE retains most of the original melody, while often changing accompanying instruments to suit the target style. This is generally desirable, since we do not want to change the pitches so thoroughly that the original song cannot be recognized anymore. We provide examples of style transfers on a range of songs from our training and test sets on YouTube (see Style transfer songs). 4 . Average before and after classifier accuracies for all classifiers (pitch/instrument/velocity) for the test set.
Figure 4 shows a t-SNE plot of the latent vectors for all bars of 20 Jazz and 20 Classic pieces. The darker the color, the more "jazzy" or "classical" a song is according to the ensemble style classifier. The genres are well separated, and most songs have all their bars clustered closely together (likely thanks to the instrument roll being constant). Some classical pieces are bleeding over into the Jazz region and vice versa. As can be seen from the light color, the ensemble style classifier did not confidently assign these pieces to either style.
We further perform a sweep over all 256 latent dimensions on randomly sampled bars to check whether changing one dimension has a measurable effect on the generated music. We define 27 metrics, among which are total number of (held) notes, mean/max/min/range of (specific or all) pitches/velocities, and style changes. Besides the obvious dimensions where the style classifier is attached, we find that some dimensions correlate with the total number of notes played in a song, the highest pitch in a bar, or the occurrence of a specific pitch. The changes can be seen when plotting the pitches, but are difficult to hear. Furthermore, the dimensions are very entangled, and changing one dimension has multiple effects. Higher values for β ∈ {1, 2, 3} slightly improve the disentanglement of la- tent dimensions, but strongly reduce reconstruction accuracy (see Figure 2 ). We added samples to YouTube to show the results of manipulating individual latent variables.
MIDI-VAE is capable of producing smooth interpolations between bars. This allows us to generate medleys by connecting short pieces from our dataset. The interpolated bars form a musically consistent bridge between the pieces, meaning that, e.g., pitch ranges and velocities increase when the target bar has higher pitch or velocity values. We can also merge entire songs together by linearly interpolating the latent vectors for two bar progressions, producing interesting mixes that are surprisingly fun to listen to. The original songs can sometimes still be identified in the mixtures, and the resulting music sounds harmonic. We again uploaded several audio samples to YouTube (see Medleys, Interpolations and Mixtures).
We introduce MIDI-VAE, a simple but effective model for performing style transfer between musical compositions. We show the effectiveness of our method on several different datasets and provide audio examples. Unlike most existing models, MIDI-VAE incorporates both the dynamics (velocity and note durations) and instrumentation of music. In the future we plan to integrate our method into a hierarchical model in order to capture style features over longer time scales and allow the generation of larger pieces of music. To facilitate future research on style transfer for symbolic music, and sequence tasks in general, we make our code and data publicly available. 5